docs/backends/generic-oracle.rst, before:

Generic Oracle backend
======================

* Native: Yes
* Master: Yes
* Slave: Yes
* Superslave: Yes
* Autoserial: No
* Case: All lower
* DNSSEC: Yes (set ``goracle-dnssec``)
* Disabled data: Yes
* Comments: Yes
* Module name: goracle
* Launch name: ``goracle``

The Generic Oracle Backend is a :doc:`generic-sql`. The default setup conforms to the
following schema, which you should add to an Oracle database. You may
need or want to add ``namespace`` statements.

Below, you will find the schema for 4.2. If you are using 4.1 or earlier, please find `the 4.1 schema on GitHub <https://github.com/PowerDNS/pdns/blob/rel/auth-4.1.x/modules/goraclebackend/schema.goracle.sql>`_.

.. literalinclude:: ../../modules/goraclebackend/schema.goracle.sql

This schema contains all elements needed for master, slave and
superslave operation.

Inserting records is a bit different compared to MySQL and PostgreSQL,
you should use:

.. code-block:: SQL

    INSERT INTO domains (id,name,type) VALUES (domains_id_sequence.nextval, 'example.net', 'NATIVE');

Settings
--------

.. _setting-goracle-tnsname:

``goracle-tnsname``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Which TNSNAME the Generic Oracle Backend should be connecting to. There
are no ``goracle-dbname``, ``goracle-host`` or ``goracle-port``
settings, their equivalent is in ``/etc/tnsnames.ora``.

.. _setting-goracle-dnssec:

``goracle-dnssec``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Enable DNSSEC processing for this backend. Default=no.

Caveats
-------

Password Expiry
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When your password is about to expire, and logging into oracle warns
about this, the Generic Oracle backend can no longer login, and will a
OCILogin2 warning.

To work around this, either update the password in time or remove
expiration from the account used.

Commit message:

note that oracle gets no free support

docs/backends/generic-oracle.rst, after:

Generic Oracle backend
======================

* Native: Yes
* Master: Yes
* Slave: Yes
* Superslave: Yes
* Autoserial: No
* Case: All lower
* DNSSEC: Yes (set ``goracle-dnssec``)
* Disabled data: Yes
* Comments: Yes
* Module name: goracle
* Launch name: ``goracle``

The Generic Oracle Backend is a :doc:`generic-sql`. The default setup conforms to the
following schema, which you should add to an Oracle database. You may
need or want to add ``namespace`` statements.

.. warning::
  The Oracle backends depend on non-free software that requires significant
  resources from us to support. Consequently, we can not provide free
  support to users of this backend. Before deploying PowerDNS with an Oracle
  database, please head to `our commercial support page
  <https://www.powerdns.com/support.html>`_.

Below, you will find the schema for 4.2. If you are using 4.1 or earlier, please find `the 4.1 schema on GitHub <https://github.com/PowerDNS/pdns/blob/rel/auth-4.1.x/modules/goraclebackend/schema.goracle.sql>`_.

.. literalinclude:: ../../modules/goraclebackend/schema.goracle.sql

This schema contains all elements needed for master, slave and
superslave operation.

Inserting records is a bit different compared to MySQL and PostgreSQL,
you should use:

.. code-block:: SQL

    INSERT INTO domains (id,name,type) VALUES (domains_id_sequence.nextval, 'example.net', 'NATIVE');

Settings
--------

.. _setting-goracle-tnsname:

``goracle-tnsname``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Which TNSNAME the Generic Oracle Backend should be connecting to. There
are no ``goracle-dbname``, ``goracle-host`` or ``goracle-port``
settings, their equivalent is in ``/etc/tnsnames.ora``.

.. _setting-goracle-dnssec:

``goracle-dnssec``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Enable DNSSEC processing for this backend. Default=no.

Caveats
-------

Password Expiry
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When your password is about to expire, and logging into oracle warns
about this, the Generic Oracle backend can no longer login, and will a
OCILogin2 warning.

To work around this, either update the password in time or remove
expiration from the account used.
