.TH DNSREPLAY 8 "September 2012" "PowerDNS"
.SH NAME
dnswasher \- A PowerDNS nameserver debugging tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dnsreplay  \fI[options]\fR \fIfilename\fR \fIip-address\fR \fI[port]\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
This program takes recorded questions and answers and replays them to a specified 
nameserver and reporting afterwards which percentage of answers matched, were worse or better. 

\fIfilename\fR is expected to be an PCAP file.
The queries are send to the DNS server specified as  \fIip-address\fR and \fI[port]\fR.
\fIip-address\fR is mandatory. If  \fI[port]\fR is omitted, 53 will be used.
dnsreplay compares the answers and some other metrics with the actual ones with those found in the dumpfile.

By default it only replay queries with recursion-desired flag set.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-help | \-h
.br
Show summary of options.
.TP
.B \-\-packet\-limit  \fInum\fR
.br
Stop after replaying \fInum\fR packets. Default for \fInum\fR is 0, which means no limit.
.TP
.B \-\-quiet  \fIflag\fR
.br
If \fIflag\fR is set to 1. dnsreplay will not be very noisy with its output. This is the default.
.TP
.B \-\-recursive  \fIflag\fR
.br
If \fIflag\fR is set to 1. dnsreplay will only replay queries with recursion desired flag set. This is the default.
.TP
.B \-\-speedup \fIfactor\fR
.br
Replay queries with this speedup factor. Default is 1.
.TP
.B \-\-timeout-msec \fItime\fR
.br
Wait at least this many milliseconds for a reply. Default is 500.
.SH BUGS
dnsreplay has no certain handling for timeouts. It handles around at most 65536 outstanding answers.
.SH SEE ALSO
pcap(3PCAP), tcpdump(8), dnswascher(8)
.SH AUTHORS
This manpage was written by Joerg Jungermann (jj+debian At borkum.net) for the 
Debian Project and the PowerDNS versatile DNS server.
