.TH PDNSSEC 8 "November 2011" "PowerDNS"
.SH NAME
pdnssec \- PowerDNSSEC command and control
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pdnssec \fI[options]\fR command
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIpdnssec\fR is a powerful command that is the operator-friendly gateway into PowerDNSSEC configuration. Behind the scenes, \fIpdnssec\fR manipulates a PowerDNS backend database, which also means that for many databases, \fIpdnssec\fR can be run remotely, and can configure key material on different servers.
.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
.B \-h [ \-\-help ]
.br
Show summary of options.
.TP
.B \-v [ \-\-verbose ]
.br
Be more verbose.
.TP
.B \-\-force
.br
force an action
.TP
.B \-\-config\-name arg
.br
Virtual configuration name
.TP
.B \-\-config\-dir arg (\=/etc/powerdns)
.br
Location of pdns.conf
.TP
.B \-\-commands arg
.br
Commands given as an argument
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B activate\-zone\-key ZONE KEY\-ID
Activate a key with id KEY-ID within a zone called ZONE.
.TP
.B add\-zone\-key ZONE [zsk|ksk] [bits] [rsasha1|rsasha256|rsasha512|gost|ecdsa256|ecdsa384]
Create a new key for zone ZONE, and make it a KSK or a ZSK, with the specified algorithm.
.TP
.B check\-zone ZONE
Check a zone for correctness
.TP
.B deactivate\-zone\-key ZONE KEY\-ID
Deactivate a key with id KEY-ID within a zone called ZONE.
.TP
.B disable\-dnssec ZONE
Deactivate all keys and unset PRESIGNED in ZONE
.TP
.B export\-zone\-dnskey ZONE KEY\-ID
Export to standard output DNSKEY and DS of key with key id KEY-ID within zone called ZONE.
.TP
.B export\-zone\-key ZONE KEY\-ID
Export to standard output full (private) key with key id KEY-ID within zone called ZONE. The format used is compatible with BIND and NSD/LDNS.
.TP
.B hash\-zone\-record ZONE RNAME
This convenience command hashes the name 'recordname' according to the NSEC3 settings of ZONE. Refuses to hash for zones with no NSEC3 settings.
.TP
.B import\-zone\-key ZONE FILE [ksk|zsk]
Import from 'filename' a full (private) key for zone called ZONE. The format used is compatible with BIND and NSD/LDNS. KSK or ZSK specifies the flags this key should have on import.
.TP
.B rectify\-zone ZONE
Calculates the 'ordername' and 'auth' fields for a zone called ZONE so they comply with DNSSEC settings. Can be used to fix up migrated data. Can always safely be run, it does no harm.
.TP
.B remove\-zone\-key ZONE KEY\-ID
Remove a key with id KEY-ID from a zone called ZONE.
.TP
.B secure\-zone ZONE
Configures a zone called ZONE with reasonable DNSSEC settings. You should manually run 'pdnssec rectify-zone' afterwards.
.TP
.B set\-nsec3 ZONE 'params' [narrow]
Sets NSEC3 parameters for this zone. A sample commandline is: "pdnssec set-nsec3 powerdnssec.org '1 1 1 ab' narrow". The NSEC3 parameters must be quoted on the command line.
.br
.B WARNING:
.br
If running in RSASHA1 mode (algorithm 5 or 7), switching from NSEC to NSEC3 will require a DS update at the parent zone!
.TP
.B set\-presigned ZONE
Switches zone to presigned operation, utilizing in-zone RRSIGs.
.TP
.B show\-zone ZONE
Shows all DNSSEC related settings of a zone called ZONE.
.TP
.B unset\-nsec3 ZONE
Converts a zone to NSEC operations.
.br
.B WARNING:
.br
If running in RSASHA1 mode (algorithm 5 or 7), switching from NSEC to NSEC3 will require a DS update at the parent zone!
.TP
.B unset\-presigned ZONE
Disables presigned operation for ZONE.
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Matthijs Möhlmann <matthijs@cacholong.nl> for the Debian Project (but may be used by others)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pdns_server (8), pdns_control (8)
