.TH ZONE2SQL 8 "December 2002" "PowerDNS"
.SH NAME
zone2sql \- Convert ISC Bind zones to SQL
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zone2sql [OPTIONS]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBZone2sql\fR parses Bind \fInamed.conf\fR files and zonefiles and outputs SQL
on standard out, which can then be fed to your database.
.PP
\fBzone2sql\fR understands the Bind master file extension '$GENERATE' and will
also honour '$ORIGIN' and '$TTL'.
.PP
For backends supporting slave operation (currently only the PostgreSQL
backend), there is also an option to keep slave zones as slaves, and not
convert them to native operation.
.PP
By default, zone2sql outputs code suitable for the mysqlbackend, but it can
also generate SQL for the Generic PostgreSQL and Oracle backends.
.SH OPTIONS
Input options:
.TP
.B \-\-named-conf=\fI<filename>\fR
Read \fI<filename>\fR to get the bind configuration
.TP
.B \-\-zone=\fI<zone\-file>\fR
Parse only this zone file. Conflicts with \fB\-\-named-conf\fR parameter.
.TP
.B \-\-zone-name=\fI<name>\fR
When parsing a single zone without $ORIGIN statement, set this as the zone
name.
.PP
Output options:
.TP
.B \-\-bare
Output in a bare format, suitable for further parsing. The output is formatted
as follows:
.RS
.nf
domain_id<TAB>'qname'<TAB>'qtype'<TAB>'content'<TAB>prio<TAB>ttl
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-gmysql
Output in format suitable for the default configuration of the Generic MySQL
backend.
.TP
.B \-\-gpgsql
Output in format suitable for the default configuration of the Generic
PostgreSQL backend.
.TP
.B \-\-mysql
Output in format suitable for the default configuration of the MySQL backend
(the default output format).
.TP
.B \-\-oracle
Output in format suitable for the default configuration of the Generic Oracle
backend.
.TP
.B \-\-transactions
For Oracle and PostgreSQL output, wrap each domain in a transaction for higher
speed and integrity.
.PP
Other options:
.TP
.B \-\-slave
Maintain slave status of zones listed in named.conf as being slaves. The
default behaviour is to convert all zones to native operation.
.TP
.B \-\-on\-error\-resume\-next
Ignore missing files during parsing. Dangerous.
.TP
.B \-\-help
List all options
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Be verbose during conversion.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pdns_server (8)
