AI_POLICY.md, before:

PowerDNS AI Usage Policy
========================

Last update: 15th September, 2025

This document tries to summarize the AI Usage Policy within
PowerDNS Authoritative Server, Recursor and dnsdist, and the rationale behind
it.

AI is a tool which, if used correctly, can benefit users and developers a lot.
However, just like any other tool, it may be misused.

The current policy is as follows:

- The use of AI tools for code contributions is **not** allowed.

  The rationale behind this is that there is no way to know whether the AI has
  been trained on code compatible with the GPL version 2 licence used by
  PowerDNS, and which persons should deserve credit for the output of the AI.

  We are also seriously worried about the ability for AI-generated code to
  introduce subtle bugs or security issues (``to err is human; to really
  foul things up requires a computer'') and we definitely do not want to
  ever appear as a nominee on https://aidarwinawards.org/

- The use of AI tools for documentation contributions, as well as for submitting
  bug reports and support requests is allowed.

  The rationale behind this is that an AI might be able to improve sentences
  and make them more readable. Of course it might also make things worse or
  introduce nonsense, so it should only be used for polishing texts, if at
  all.

- Be transparent about AI use, by which we mean that all uses of AI should be
  explicitly disclosed as such, so that if further issues related to AI use
  occur (ethics, intellectual property, ...) we know which contributions need
  to be checked.

This policy is in immediate effect.

Commit message:

Sligthly reword the AI policy so it may apply to more projects.
Signed-off-by: Miod Vallat <miod.vallat@powerdns.com>

AI_POLICY.md, after:

PowerDNS AI Usage Policy
========================

Last update: 1st December, 2025

This document tries to summarize the AI Usage Policy within
PowerDNS Authoritative Server, Recursor and dnsdist, and the rationale behind
it.

AI is a tool which, if used correctly, can benefit users and developers a lot.
However, just like any other tool, it may be misused.

The current policy is as follows:

- The use of AI tools for code contributions is **not** allowed.

  The rationale behind this is that there is no way to know whether the AI has
  been trained only on code compatible with licences used by the various
  PowerDNS software projects, and which persons should deserve credit for the
  output of the AI.

  We are also seriously worried about the ability for AI-generated code to
  introduce subtle bugs or security issues (``to err is human; to really
  foul things up requires a computer'') and we definitely do not want to
  ever appear as a nominee on https://aidarwinawards.org/

- The use of AI tools for documentation contributions, as well as for submitting
  bug reports and support requests is allowed.

  The rationale behind this is that an AI might be able to improve sentences
  and make them more readable. Of course it might also make things worse or
  introduce nonsense, so it should only be used for polishing texts, if at
  all.

- Be transparent about AI use, by which we mean that all uses of AI should be
  explicitly disclosed as such, so that if further issues related to AI use
  occur (ethics, intellectual property, ...) we know which contributions need
  to be checked.

This policy is in immediate effect.
