SECURITY.md, before:

PowerDNS Security Policy
========================

If you have a security problem to report, please email us at both security@powerdns.com and ahu@ds9a.nl.
In case you want to encrypt your report using PGP, please use: 
https://www.powerdns.com/powerdns-keyblock.asc

Please do not mail security issues to public lists, nor file a ticket, unless we do not get back to you in a timely manner.
We fully credit reporters of security issues, and respond quickly, but please allow us a reasonable timeframe to coordinate a response.

We remind PowerDNS users that under the terms of the GNU General Public License, PowerDNS comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.
This license is included in this documentation.

HackerOne
---------
Security issues can also be reported on [our HackerOne page](https://hackerone.com/powerdns) and might fetch a bounty.
Do note that only the PowerDNS software is in scope for the HackerOne program, not our websites or other infrastructure.

Disclosure Policy
-----------------
- Let us know as soon as possible upon discovery of a potential security issue, and we'll make every effort to quickly resolve the issue.
- Provide us a reasonable amount of time to resolve the issue before any disclosure to the public or a third-party.
- We will always credit researchers in our security advisories.

Commit message:

Be more than explicit about the fact that dnsdist is also covered

SECURITY.md, after:

PowerDNS and dnsdist Security Policy
====================================

If you have a security problem to report, please email us at both security@powerdns.com and ahu@ds9a.nl.
In case you want to encrypt your report using PGP, please use: https://www.powerdns.com/powerdns-keyblock.asc

Please do not mail security issues to public lists, nor file a ticket, unless we do not get back to you in a timely manner.
We fully credit reporters of security issues, and respond quickly, but please allow us a reasonable timeframe to coordinate a response.

We remind PowerDNS and dnsdist users that under the terms of the GNU General Public License, PowerDNS and dnsdist come with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.
This license is included in this documentation.

HackerOne
---------
Security issues can also be reported on [our HackerOne page](https://hackerone.com/powerdns) and might fetch a bounty.
Do note that only the PowerDNS software (PowerDNS Authoritative Server, the PowerDNS Recursor and dnsdist) is in scope for the HackerOne program, not our websites or other infrastructure.

Disclosure Policy
-----------------
- Let us know as soon as possible upon discovery of a potential security issue, and we'll make every effort to quickly resolve the issue.
- Provide us a reasonable amount of time to resolve the issue before any disclosure to the public or a third-party.
- We will always credit researchers in our security advisories.
