docs/manpages/ixfrdist.yml.5.rst, before:

ixfrdist.yml
============

Synopsis
--------

ixfrdist.yml

Description
-----------

:program:`ixfrdist` reads its configuration for a YAML file.
By default, this file is called `ixfrdist.yml` and is read from the directory configured as `SYSCONFDIR` when building the software.
This directory is usually one of `/etc/pdns`, `/etc/powerdns`.
Run `ixfrdist --help` to see the default.

Example
-------

.. code-block:: yaml

  listen:
    - 192.0.2.2
    - '[2001:DB8:ABCD::2]:5300'
    - 127.0.0.1

  acl:
    - 127.0.0.1
    - '192.0.2.0/24'
    - '2001:DB8:ABCD:1234::/64'

  work-dir: /var/lib/ixfrdist

  uid: ixfrdist
  gid: ixfrdist

  domains:
    - domain: example.com
      master: 192.0.2.18:5301
    - domain: example.net
      master: 2001:DB8:ABCD::2

Options
-------

:listen:
  The list of addresses to listen on.
  :program:`ixfrdist` listens on both TCP and UDP.
  When no port is specified, 53 is used. When specifying ports for IPv6, use the "bracket" notation.
  By default, :program:`ixfrdist` listens on ``127.0.0.1:53`` and ``[::1]:53``.

:acl:
  A list of netmasks that are allowed to query :program:`ixfrdist` and request AXFRs and IXFRs
  Entries without a netmask will be interpreted as a single address.
  By default, the ACL is set is ``127.0.0.0/8`` and ``::1/128``.

:axfr-timeout:
  Timeout in seconds an AXFR transaction requested by :program:`ixfrdist` may take.
  Increase this when the network to the authoritative servers is slow or the domains are very large and you experience timeouts.
  Defaults to 20.

:failed-soa-retry:
  Time in seconds between retries of the SOA query for a zone we have never transferred. Defaults to 30.

:compress:
  Whether record compression should be enabled, leading to smaller answers at the cost of an increased CPU and memory usage.
  Defaults to false.

:work-dir:
  The directory where the domain data is stored.
  When not set, the current working directory is used.
  This working directory has the following structure: ``work-dir/ZONE/SERIAL``, e.g. ``work-dir/rpz.example./2018011902``.
  It is highly recommended to set this option, as the current working directory might change between invocations.
  This directory must be writable for the user or group :program:`ixfrdist` runs as.

:keep:
  Amount of older copies/IXFR diffs to keep for every domain.
  This is set to 20 by default.

:tcp-in-threads:
  Number of threads to spawn for TCP connections (AXFRs) from downstream hosts.
  This limits the number of concurrent AXFRs to clients.
  Set to 10 by default.

:gid:
  Group name or numeric ID to drop privileges to after binding the listen sockets.
  By default, :program:`ixfrdist` runs as the user that started the process.

:uid:
  User name or numeric ID to drop privileges to after binding the listen sockets.
  By default, :program:`ixfrdist` runs as the user that started the process.

:domains:
  A list of domains to redistribute.
  This option is mandatory.

  :domain: The domain name to transfer from the ``master``.
           Mandatory.
  :master: IP address of the server to transfer this domain from.
           Mandatory.

See also
--------

:manpage:`ixfrdist(1)`

Commit message:

ixfrdist: document the webserver settings

docs/manpages/ixfrdist.yml.5.rst, after:

ixfrdist.yml
============

Synopsis
--------

ixfrdist.yml

Description
-----------

:program:`ixfrdist` reads its configuration for a YAML file.
By default, this file is called `ixfrdist.yml` and is read from the directory configured as `SYSCONFDIR` when building the software.
This directory is usually one of `/etc/pdns`, `/etc/powerdns`.
Run `ixfrdist --help` to see the default.

Example
-------

.. code-block:: yaml

  listen:
    - 192.0.2.2
    - '[2001:DB8:ABCD::2]:5300'
    - 127.0.0.1

  acl:
    - 127.0.0.1
    - '192.0.2.0/24'
    - '2001:DB8:ABCD:1234::/64'

  work-dir: /var/lib/ixfrdist

  uid: ixfrdist
  gid: ixfrdist

  domains:
    - domain: example.com
      master: 192.0.2.18:5301
    - domain: example.net
      master: 2001:DB8:ABCD::2

Options
-------

:listen:
  The list of addresses to listen on.
  :program:`ixfrdist` listens on both TCP and UDP.
  When no port is specified, 53 is used. When specifying ports for IPv6, use the "bracket" notation.
  By default, :program:`ixfrdist` listens on ``127.0.0.1:53`` and ``[::1]:53``.

:acl:
  A list of netmasks that are allowed to query :program:`ixfrdist` and request AXFRs and IXFRs
  Entries without a netmask will be interpreted as a single address.
  By default, the ACL is set is ``127.0.0.0/8`` and ``::1/128``.

:axfr-timeout:
  Timeout in seconds an AXFR transaction requested by :program:`ixfrdist` may take.
  Increase this when the network to the authoritative servers is slow or the domains are very large and you experience timeouts.
  Defaults to 20.

:failed-soa-retry:
  Time in seconds between retries of the SOA query for a zone we have never transferred. Defaults to 30.

:compress:
  Whether record compression should be enabled, leading to smaller answers at the cost of an increased CPU and memory usage.
  Defaults to false.

:work-dir:
  The directory where the domain data is stored.
  When not set, the current working directory is used.
  This working directory has the following structure: ``work-dir/ZONE/SERIAL``, e.g. ``work-dir/rpz.example./2018011902``.
  It is highly recommended to set this option, as the current working directory might change between invocations.
  This directory must be writable for the user or group :program:`ixfrdist` runs as.

:keep:
  Amount of older copies/IXFR diffs to keep for every domain.
  This is set to 20 by default.

:tcp-in-threads:
  Number of threads to spawn for TCP connections (AXFRs) from downstream hosts.
  This limits the number of concurrent AXFRs to clients.
  Set to 10 by default.

:gid:
  Group name or numeric ID to drop privileges to after binding the listen sockets.
  By default, :program:`ixfrdist` runs as the user that started the process.

:uid:
  User name or numeric ID to drop privileges to after binding the listen sockets.
  By default, :program:`ixfrdist` runs as the user that started the process.

:domains:
  A list of domains to redistribute.
  This option is mandatory.

  :domain: The domain name to transfer from the ``master``.
           Mandatory.
  :master: IP address of the server to transfer this domain from.
           Mandatory.

:webserver-address:
  IP address to listen on for the built-in webserver.
  When not set, no webserver is started.

:webserver-acl:
  A list of networks that are allowed to access the :program:`ixfrdist` webserver.
  Entries without a netmask will be interpreted as a single address.
  By default, this list is set to ``127.0.0.0/8`` and ``::1/128``.

See also
--------

:manpage:`ixfrdist(1)`
