docs/manpages/pdnsutil.1.rst, before:

pdnsutil
========

Synopsis
--------

pdnsutil [OPTION]... *COMMAND*

Description
-----------

:program:`pdnsutil` (formerly pdnssec) is a powerful command that is the
operator-friendly gateway into DNSSEC and zone management for PowerDNS.
Behind the scenes, :program:`pdnsutil` manipulates a PowerDNS backend database,
which also means that for many databases, :program:`pdnsutil` can be run
remotely, and can configure key material on different servers.

Options
-------

-h, --help              Show summary of options
-v, --verbose           Be more verbose.
--force                 Force an action
--config-name <NAME>    Virtual configuration name
--config-dir <DIR>      Location of pdns.conf. Default is /etc/powerdns.

COMMANDS
--------

There are many available commands, this section splits them up into
their respective uses

DNSSEC RELATED COMMANDS
-----------------------

Several commands manipulate the DNSSEC keys and options for zones. Some
of these commands require an *ALGORITHM* to be set. The following
algorithms are supported:

-  rsasha1
-  rsasha1-nsec3-sha1
-  rsasha256
-  rsasha512
-  ecdsa256
-  ecdsa384
-  ed25519
-  ed448

activate-zone-key *ZONE* *KEY-ID*
    Activate a key with id *KEY-ID* within a zone called *ZONE*.
add-zone-key *ZONE* {**KSK**,\ **ZSK**} [**active**,\ **inactive**] *KEYBITS* *ALGORITHM*
    Create a new key for zone *ZONE*, and make it a KSK or a ZSK, with
    the specified algorithm. The key is inactive by default, set it to
    **active** to immediately use it to sign *ZONE*. Prints the id of
    the added key.
create-bind-db *FILE*
    Create DNSSEC database (sqlite3) at *FILE* for the BIND backend.
    Remember to set ``bind-dnssec-db=*FILE*`` in your ``pdns.conf``.
deactivate-zone-key *ZONE* *KEY-ID*
    Deactivate a key with id KEY-ID within a zone called *ZONE*.
disable-dnssec *ZONE*
    Deactivate all keys and unset PRESIGNED in *ZONE*.
export-zone-dnskey *ZONE* *KEY-ID*
    Export to standard output DNSKEY and DS of key with key id *KEY-ID*
    within zone called *ZONE*.
export-zone-ds *ZONE*
    Export to standard output all KSK DS records for *ZONE*.
export-zone-key *ZONE* *KEY-ID*
    Export to standard output full (private) key with key id *KEY-ID*
    within zone called *ZONE*. The format used is compatible with BIND
    and NSD/LDNS.
generate-zone-key {**KSK**,\ **ZSK**} [*ALGORITHM*] [*KEYBITS*]
    Generate a ZSK or KSK to stdout with specified algorithm and bits
    and print it on STDOUT. If *ALGORITHM* is not set, ECDSA256 is
    used. If *KEYBITS* is not set, an appropriate keysize is selected
    for *ALGORITHM*. Each ECC-based algorithm supports only one valid
    *KEYBITS* value: For ECDSA256 and ED25519, it is 256; for ECDSA384,
    it is 384; and for ED448, it is 456.
import-zone-key *ZONE* *FILE* {**KSK**,\ **ZSK**}
    Import from *FILE* a full (private) key for zone called *ZONE*. The
    format used is compatible with BIND and NSD/LDNS. **KSK** or **ZSK**
    specifies the flags this key should have on import. Prints the id of
    the added key.
remove-zone-key *ZONE* *KEY-ID*
    Remove a key with id *KEY-ID* from a zone called *ZONE*.
set-nsec3 *ZONE* ['*HASH-ALGORITHM* *FLAGS* *ITERATIONS* *SALT*'] [**narrow**]
    Sets NSEC3 parameters for this zone. The quoted parameters are 4
    values that are used for the the NSEC3PARAM record and decide how
    NSEC3 records are created. The NSEC3 parameters must be quoted on
    the command line. *HASH-ALGORITHM* must be 1 (SHA-1). Setting
    *FLAGS* to 1 enables NSEC3 opt-out operation. Only do this if you
    know you need it. For *ITERATIONS*, please consult RFC 5155, section
    10.3. And be aware that a high number might overload validating
    resolvers and that a limit can be set with ``max-nsec3-iterations``
    in ``pdns.conf``. The *SALT* is a hexadecimal string encoding the bits
    for the salt, or - to use no salt. Setting **narrow** will make PowerDNS
    send out "white lies" (RFC 7129) about the next secure record to
    prevent zone enumeration. Instead of looking it up in the database,
    it will send out the hash + 1 as the next secure record. Narrow mode
    requires online signing capabilities by the nameserver and therefore
    zone transfers are denied. If only the zone is provided as argument,
    the 4-parameter quoted string defaults to ``'1 0 1 ab'``. A sample
    commandline is: ``pdnsutil set-nsec3 powerdnssec.org '1 1 1 ab' narrow``.
    **WARNING**: If running in RSASHA1 mode (algorithm 5 or 7), switching
    from NSEC to NSEC3 will require a DS update in the parent zone.
unset-nsec3 *ZONE*
    Converts *ZONE* to NSEC operations. **WARNING**: If running in
    RSASHA1 mode (algorithm 5 or 7), switching from NSEC to NSEC3 will
    require a DS update at the parent zone!
set-publish-cds *ZONE* [*DIGESTALGOS*]
    Set *ZONE* to respond to queries for its CDS records. the optional
    argument *DIGESTALGOS* should be a comma-separated list of DS
    algorithms to use. By default, this is 2 (SHA-256).
set-publish-cdnskey *ZONE*
    Set *ZONE* to publish CDNSKEY records.
unset-publish-cds *ZONE*
    Set *ZONE* to stop responding to queries for its CDS records.
unset-publish-cdnskey *ZONE*
    Set *ZONE* to stop publishing CDNSKEY records.

TSIG RELATED COMMANDS
---------------------

These commands manipulate TSIG key information in the database. Some
commands require an *ALGORITHM*, the following are available:

-  hmac-md5
-  hmac-sha1
-  hmac-sha224
-  hmac-sha256
-  hmac-sha384
-  hmac-sha512

activate-tsig-key *ZONE* *NAME* {**master**,\ **slave**}
    Enable TSIG authenticated AXFR using the key *NAME* for zone *ZONE*.
    This sets the ``TSIG-ALLOW-AXFR`` (master) or ``AXFR-MASTER-TSIG``
    (slave) zone metadata.
deactivate-tsig-key *ZONE* *NAME* {**master**,\ **slave**}
    Disable TSIG authenticated AXFR using the key *NAME* for zone
    *ZONE*.
delete-tsig-key *NAME*
    Delete the TSIG key *NAME*. Warning, this does not deactivate said
    key.
generate-tsig-key *NAME* *ALGORITHM*
    Generate new TSIG key with name *NAME* and the specified algorithm.
import-tsig-key *NAME* *ALGORITHM* *KEY*
    Import *KEY* of the specified algorithm as *NAME*.
list-tsig-keys
    Show a list of all configured TSIG keys.

ZONE MANIPULATION COMMANDS
--------------------------

add-record *ZONE* *NAME* *TYPE* [*TTL*] *CONTENT*
    Add one or more records of *NAME* and *TYPE* to *ZONE* with *CONTENT* 
    and optional *TTL*. If *TTL* is not set, default will be used. 
create-zone *ZONE*
    Create an empty zone named *ZONE*.
create-slave-zone *ZONE* *MASTER* [*MASTER*]..
    Create a new slave zone *ZONE* with masters *MASTER*. All *MASTER*\ s
    need to to be space-separated IP addresses with an optional port.
change-slave-zone-master *ZONE* *MASTER* [*MASTER*]..
    Change the masters for slave zone *ZONE* to new masters *MASTER*. All
    *MASTER*\ s need to to be space-separated IP addresses with an optional port.
check-all-zones
    Check all zones for correctness.
check-zone *ZONE*
    Check zone *ZONE* for correctness.
clear-zone *ZONE*
    Clear the records in zone *ZONE*, but leave actual domain and
    settings unchanged
delete-rrset *ZONE* *NAME* *TYPE*
    Delete named RRSET from zone.
delete-zone *ZONE*:
    Delete the zone named *ZONE*.
edit-zone *ZONE*
    Opens *ZONE* in zonefile format (regardless of backend it was loaded
    from) in the editor set in the environment variable **EDITOR**. if
    **EDITOR** is empty, *pdnsutil* falls back to using *editor*.
get-meta *ZONE* [*ATTRIBUTE*]...
    Get zone metadata. If no *ATTRIBUTE* given, lists all known.
hash-zone-record *ZONE* *RNAME*
    This convenience command hashes the name *RNAME* according to the
    NSEC3 settings of *ZONE*. Refuses to hash for zones with no NSEC3
    settings.
increase-serial *ZONE*
    Increases the SOA-serial by 1. Uses SOA-EDIT.
list-keys [*ZONE*]
    List DNSSEC information for all keys or for *ZONE*.
list-all-zones:
    List all zone names.
list-zone *ZONE*
    Show all records for *ZONE*.
load-zone *ZONE* *FILE*
    Load records for *ZONE* from *FILE*. If *ZONE* already exists, all
    records are overwritten, this operation is atomic. If *ZONE* doesn't
    exist, it is created.
rectify-zone *ZONE*
    Calculates the 'ordername' and 'auth' fields for a zone called
    *ZONE* so they comply with DNSSEC settings. Can be used to fix up
    migrated data. Can always safely be run, it does no harm.
rectify-all-zones
    Calculates the 'ordername' and 'auth' fields for all zones so they
    comply with DNSSEC settings. Can be used to fix up migrated data.
    Can always safely be run, it does no harm.
replace-rrset *ZONE* *NAME* *TYPE* [*TTL*] *CONTENT* [*CONTENT*..]
    Replace existing *NAME* in zone *ZONE* with a new set.
secure-zone *ZONE*
    Configures a zone called *ZONE* with reasonable DNSSEC settings. You
    should manually run 'pdnsutil rectify-zone' afterwards.
secure-all-zones [**increase-serial**]
    Configures all zones that are not currently signed with reasonable
    DNSSEC settings. Setting **increase-serial** will increase the
    serial of those zones too. You should manually run 'pdnsutil
    rectify-all-zones' afterwards.
set-kind *ZONE* *KIND*
    Change the kind of *ZONE* to *KIND* (master, slave, native).
set-account *ZONE* *ACCOUNT*
    Change the account (owner) of *ZONE* to *ACCOUNT*.
add-meta *ZONE* *ATTRIBUTE* *VALUE* [*VALUE*]...
    Append *VALUE* to the existing *ATTRIBUTE* metadata for *ZONE*.
    Will return an error if *ATTRIBUTE* does not support multiple values, use
    **set-meta** for these values.
set-meta *ZONE* *ATTRIBUTE* [*VALUE*]...
    Set domainmetadata *ATTRIBUTE* for *ZONE* to *VALUE*. An empty value
    clears it.
set-presigned *ZONE*
    Switches *ZONE* to presigned operation, utilizing in-zone RRSIGs.
show-zone *ZONE*
    Shows all DNSSEC related settings of a zone called *ZONE*.
test-schema *ZONE*
    Test database schema, this creates the zone *ZONE*
unset-presigned *ZONE*
    Disables presigned operation for *ZONE*.

DEBUGGING TOOLS
---------------

backend-cmd *BACKEND* *CMD* [*CMD..*]
    Send a text command to a backend for execution. GSQL backends will
    take SQL commands, other backends may take different things. Be
    careful!
bench-db [*FILE*]
    Perform a benchmark of the backend-database.
    *FILE* can be a file with a list, one per line, of domain names to use for this.
    If *FILE* is not specified, powerdns.com is used.

OTHER TOOLS
-----------
ipencrypt *IP-ADDRESS* passsword
    Encrypt an IP address according to the 'ipcipher' standard

ipdecrypt *IP-ADDRESS* passsword
    Encrypt an IP address according to the 'ipcipher' standard

See also
--------

pdns\_server (1), pdns\_control (1)

Commit message:

Implement published and unpublished dnskeys to allow algorith rollovers.

docs/manpages/pdnsutil.1.rst, after:

pdnsutil
========

Synopsis
--------

pdnsutil [OPTION]... *COMMAND*

Description
-----------

:program:`pdnsutil` (formerly pdnssec) is a powerful command that is the
operator-friendly gateway into DNSSEC and zone management for PowerDNS.
Behind the scenes, :program:`pdnsutil` manipulates a PowerDNS backend database,
which also means that for many databases, :program:`pdnsutil` can be run
remotely, and can configure key material on different servers.

Options
-------

-h, --help              Show summary of options
-v, --verbose           Be more verbose.
--force                 Force an action
--config-name <NAME>    Virtual configuration name
--config-dir <DIR>      Location of pdns.conf. Default is /etc/powerdns.

COMMANDS
--------

There are many available commands, this section splits them up into
their respective uses

DNSSEC RELATED COMMANDS
-----------------------

Several commands manipulate the DNSSEC keys and options for zones. Some
of these commands require an *ALGORITHM* to be set. The following
algorithms are supported:

-  rsasha1
-  rsasha1-nsec3-sha1
-  rsasha256
-  rsasha512
-  ecdsa256
-  ecdsa384
-  ed25519
-  ed448

activate-zone-key *ZONE* *KEY-ID*
    Activate a key with id *KEY-ID* within a zone called *ZONE*.
add-zone-key *ZONE* {**KSK**,\ **ZSK**} [**active**,\ **inactive**] [**published**,\ **unpublished**] *KEYBITS* *ALGORITHM*
    Create a new key for zone *ZONE*, and make it a KSK or a ZSK, with
    the specified algorithm. The key is inactive by default, set it to
    **active** to immediately use it to sign *ZONE*. The key is published
    in the zone by default, set it to **unpublished** to keep it from
    being returned in a DNSKEY query, which is useful for algorithm
    rollovers. Prints the id of the added key.
create-bind-db *FILE*
    Create DNSSEC database (sqlite3) at *FILE* for the BIND backend.
    Remember to set ``bind-dnssec-db=*FILE*`` in your ``pdns.conf``.
deactivate-zone-key *ZONE* *KEY-ID*
    Deactivate a key with id KEY-ID within a zone called *ZONE*.
disable-dnssec *ZONE*
    Deactivate all keys and unset PRESIGNED in *ZONE*.
export-zone-dnskey *ZONE* *KEY-ID*
    Export to standard output DNSKEY and DS of key with key id *KEY-ID*
    within zone called *ZONE*.
export-zone-ds *ZONE*
    Export to standard output all KSK DS records for *ZONE*.
export-zone-key *ZONE* *KEY-ID*
    Export to standard output full (private) key with key id *KEY-ID*
    within zone called *ZONE*. The format used is compatible with BIND
    and NSD/LDNS.
generate-zone-key {**KSK**,\ **ZSK**} [*ALGORITHM*] [*KEYBITS*]
    Generate a ZSK or KSK to stdout with specified algorithm and bits
    and print it on STDOUT. If *ALGORITHM* is not set, ECDSA256 is
    used. If *KEYBITS* is not set, an appropriate keysize is selected
    for *ALGORITHM*. Each ECC-based algorithm supports only one valid
    *KEYBITS* value: For ECDSA256 and ED25519, it is 256; for ECDSA384,
    it is 384; and for ED448, it is 456.
import-zone-key *ZONE* *FILE* {**KSK**,\ **ZSK**}
    Import from *FILE* a full (private) key for zone called *ZONE*. The
    format used is compatible with BIND and NSD/LDNS. **KSK** or **ZSK**
    specifies the flags this key should have on import. Prints the id of
    the added key.
publish-zone-key *ZONE* *KEY-ID*
    Publish the key with id *KEY-ID* within a zone called *ZONE*.
remove-zone-key *ZONE* *KEY-ID*
    Remove a key with id *KEY-ID* from a zone called *ZONE*.
set-nsec3 *ZONE* ['*HASH-ALGORITHM* *FLAGS* *ITERATIONS* *SALT*'] [**narrow**]
    Sets NSEC3 parameters for this zone. The quoted parameters are 4
    values that are used for the the NSEC3PARAM record and decide how
    NSEC3 records are created. The NSEC3 parameters must be quoted on
    the command line. *HASH-ALGORITHM* must be 1 (SHA-1). Setting
    *FLAGS* to 1 enables NSEC3 opt-out operation. Only do this if you
    know you need it. For *ITERATIONS*, please consult RFC 5155, section
    10.3. And be aware that a high number might overload validating
    resolvers and that a limit can be set with ``max-nsec3-iterations``
    in ``pdns.conf``. The *SALT* is a hexadecimal string encoding the bits
    for the salt, or - to use no salt. Setting **narrow** will make PowerDNS
    send out "white lies" (RFC 7129) about the next secure record to
    prevent zone enumeration. Instead of looking it up in the database,
    it will send out the hash + 1 as the next secure record. Narrow mode
    requires online signing capabilities by the nameserver and therefore
    zone transfers are denied. If only the zone is provided as argument,
    the 4-parameter quoted string defaults to ``'1 0 1 ab'``. A sample
    commandline is: ``pdnsutil set-nsec3 powerdnssec.org '1 1 1 ab' narrow``.
    **WARNING**: If running in RSASHA1 mode (algorithm 5 or 7), switching
    from NSEC to NSEC3 will require a DS update in the parent zone.
unpublish-zone-key *ZONE* *KEY-ID*
    Unpublish the key with id *KEY-ID* within a zone called *ZONE*.
unset-nsec3 *ZONE*
    Converts *ZONE* to NSEC operations. **WARNING**: If running in
    RSASHA1 mode (algorithm 5 or 7), switching from NSEC to NSEC3 will
    require a DS update at the parent zone!
set-publish-cds *ZONE* [*DIGESTALGOS*]
    Set *ZONE* to respond to queries for its CDS records. the optional
    argument *DIGESTALGOS* should be a comma-separated list of DS
    algorithms to use. By default, this is 2 (SHA-256).
set-publish-cdnskey *ZONE*
    Set *ZONE* to publish CDNSKEY records.
unset-publish-cds *ZONE*
    Set *ZONE* to stop responding to queries for its CDS records.
unset-publish-cdnskey *ZONE*
    Set *ZONE* to stop publishing CDNSKEY records.

TSIG RELATED COMMANDS
---------------------

These commands manipulate TSIG key information in the database. Some
commands require an *ALGORITHM*, the following are available:

-  hmac-md5
-  hmac-sha1
-  hmac-sha224
-  hmac-sha256
-  hmac-sha384
-  hmac-sha512

activate-tsig-key *ZONE* *NAME* {**master**,\ **slave**}
    Enable TSIG authenticated AXFR using the key *NAME* for zone *ZONE*.
    This sets the ``TSIG-ALLOW-AXFR`` (master) or ``AXFR-MASTER-TSIG``
    (slave) zone metadata.
deactivate-tsig-key *ZONE* *NAME* {**master**,\ **slave**}
    Disable TSIG authenticated AXFR using the key *NAME* for zone
    *ZONE*.
delete-tsig-key *NAME*
    Delete the TSIG key *NAME*. Warning, this does not deactivate said
    key.
generate-tsig-key *NAME* *ALGORITHM*
    Generate new TSIG key with name *NAME* and the specified algorithm.
import-tsig-key *NAME* *ALGORITHM* *KEY*
    Import *KEY* of the specified algorithm as *NAME*.
list-tsig-keys
    Show a list of all configured TSIG keys.

ZONE MANIPULATION COMMANDS
--------------------------

add-record *ZONE* *NAME* *TYPE* [*TTL*] *CONTENT*
    Add one or more records of *NAME* and *TYPE* to *ZONE* with *CONTENT* 
    and optional *TTL*. If *TTL* is not set, default will be used. 
create-zone *ZONE*
    Create an empty zone named *ZONE*.
create-slave-zone *ZONE* *MASTER* [*MASTER*]..
    Create a new slave zone *ZONE* with masters *MASTER*. All *MASTER*\ s
    need to to be space-separated IP addresses with an optional port.
change-slave-zone-master *ZONE* *MASTER* [*MASTER*]..
    Change the masters for slave zone *ZONE* to new masters *MASTER*. All
    *MASTER*\ s need to to be space-separated IP addresses with an optional port.
check-all-zones
    Check all zones for correctness.
check-zone *ZONE*
    Check zone *ZONE* for correctness.
clear-zone *ZONE*
    Clear the records in zone *ZONE*, but leave actual domain and
    settings unchanged
delete-rrset *ZONE* *NAME* *TYPE*
    Delete named RRSET from zone.
delete-zone *ZONE*:
    Delete the zone named *ZONE*.
edit-zone *ZONE*
    Opens *ZONE* in zonefile format (regardless of backend it was loaded
    from) in the editor set in the environment variable **EDITOR**. if
    **EDITOR** is empty, *pdnsutil* falls back to using *editor*.
get-meta *ZONE* [*ATTRIBUTE*]...
    Get zone metadata. If no *ATTRIBUTE* given, lists all known.
hash-zone-record *ZONE* *RNAME*
    This convenience command hashes the name *RNAME* according to the
    NSEC3 settings of *ZONE*. Refuses to hash for zones with no NSEC3
    settings.
increase-serial *ZONE*
    Increases the SOA-serial by 1. Uses SOA-EDIT.
list-keys [*ZONE*]
    List DNSSEC information for all keys or for *ZONE*.
list-all-zones:
    List all zone names.
list-zone *ZONE*
    Show all records for *ZONE*.
load-zone *ZONE* *FILE*
    Load records for *ZONE* from *FILE*. If *ZONE* already exists, all
    records are overwritten, this operation is atomic. If *ZONE* doesn't
    exist, it is created.
rectify-zone *ZONE*
    Calculates the 'ordername' and 'auth' fields for a zone called
    *ZONE* so they comply with DNSSEC settings. Can be used to fix up
    migrated data. Can always safely be run, it does no harm.
rectify-all-zones
    Calculates the 'ordername' and 'auth' fields for all zones so they
    comply with DNSSEC settings. Can be used to fix up migrated data.
    Can always safely be run, it does no harm.
replace-rrset *ZONE* *NAME* *TYPE* [*TTL*] *CONTENT* [*CONTENT*..]
    Replace existing *NAME* in zone *ZONE* with a new set.
secure-zone *ZONE*
    Configures a zone called *ZONE* with reasonable DNSSEC settings. You
    should manually run 'pdnsutil rectify-zone' afterwards.
secure-all-zones [**increase-serial**]
    Configures all zones that are not currently signed with reasonable
    DNSSEC settings. Setting **increase-serial** will increase the
    serial of those zones too. You should manually run 'pdnsutil
    rectify-all-zones' afterwards.
set-kind *ZONE* *KIND*
    Change the kind of *ZONE* to *KIND* (master, slave, native).
set-account *ZONE* *ACCOUNT*
    Change the account (owner) of *ZONE* to *ACCOUNT*.
add-meta *ZONE* *ATTRIBUTE* *VALUE* [*VALUE*]...
    Append *VALUE* to the existing *ATTRIBUTE* metadata for *ZONE*.
    Will return an error if *ATTRIBUTE* does not support multiple values, use
    **set-meta** for these values.
set-meta *ZONE* *ATTRIBUTE* [*VALUE*]...
    Set domainmetadata *ATTRIBUTE* for *ZONE* to *VALUE*. An empty value
    clears it.
set-presigned *ZONE*
    Switches *ZONE* to presigned operation, utilizing in-zone RRSIGs.
show-zone *ZONE*
    Shows all DNSSEC related settings of a zone called *ZONE*.
test-schema *ZONE*
    Test database schema, this creates the zone *ZONE*
unset-presigned *ZONE*
    Disables presigned operation for *ZONE*.

DEBUGGING TOOLS
---------------

backend-cmd *BACKEND* *CMD* [*CMD..*]
    Send a text command to a backend for execution. GSQL backends will
    take SQL commands, other backends may take different things. Be
    careful!
bench-db [*FILE*]
    Perform a benchmark of the backend-database.
    *FILE* can be a file with a list, one per line, of domain names to use for this.
    If *FILE* is not specified, powerdns.com is used.

OTHER TOOLS
-----------
ipencrypt *IP-ADDRESS* passsword
    Encrypt an IP address according to the 'ipcipher' standard

ipdecrypt *IP-ADDRESS* passsword
    Encrypt an IP address according to the 'ipcipher' standard

See also
--------

pdns\_server (1), pdns\_control (1)
