docs/manpages/sdig.1.rst, before:

sdig
====

Synopsis
--------

:program:`sdig` *IP-ADDRESS-OR-DOH-URL * *PORT* *QNAME* *QTYPE* [*OPTION*]

Description
-----------

:program:`sdig` sends a DNS query to *IP-ADDRESS-OR-DOH-URL* on port *PORT* and displays
the answer in a formatted way.
If the address starts with an ``h``, it is assumed to be a DoH endpoint, and *PORT* is ignored.
If qname and qtype are both `-` and tcp is used, multiple lines are read
form stdin, where each line contains a qname and a type.

Options
-------

These options can be added to the commandline in any order.

dnssec
    Set the DO bit to request DNSSEC information.
ednssubnet *SUBNET*
    Send *SUBNET* in the edns-client-subnet option. If this option is
    not set, no edns-client-subnet option is set in the query.
hidesoadetails
    Don't show the SOA serial in the response.
hidettl
    Replace TTLs with `[ttl]` in the response.
recurse
    Set the RD bit in the question.
showflags
    Show the NSEC3 flags in the response (they are hidden by default).
tcp
    Use TCP instead of UDP to send the query.
xpf *XPFCODE* *XPFVERSION* *XPFPROTO* *XPFSRC* *XPFSRC*
	Send an *XPF* additional with these parameters.

Commit message:

sdig: make query class selectable

docs/manpages/sdig.1.rst, after:

sdig
====

Synopsis
--------

:program:`sdig` *IP-ADDRESS-OR-DOH-URL * *PORT* *QNAME* *QTYPE* [*OPTION*]

Description
-----------

:program:`sdig` sends a DNS query to *IP-ADDRESS-OR-DOH-URL* on port *PORT* and displays
the answer in a formatted way.
If the address starts with an ``h``, it is assumed to be a DoH endpoint, and *PORT* is ignored.
If qname and qtype are both `-` and tcp is used, multiple lines are read
form stdin, where each line contains a qname and a type.

Options
-------

These options can be added to the commandline in any order.

class *CLASSNUM*
    Send the query in the numbered class (like 3 for CHAOS) instead of the default 1 (for IN).
dnssec
    Set the DO bit to request DNSSEC information.
ednssubnet *SUBNET*
    Send *SUBNET* in the edns-client-subnet option. If this option is
    not set, no edns-client-subnet option is set in the query.
hidesoadetails
    Don't show the SOA serial in the response.
hidettl
    Replace TTLs with `[ttl]` in the response.
recurse
    Set the RD bit in the question.
showflags
    Show the NSEC3 flags in the response (they are hidden by default).
tcp
    Use TCP instead of UDP to send the query.
xpf *XPFCODE* *XPFVERSION* *XPFPROTO* *XPFSRC* *XPFSRC*
	Send an *XPF* additional with these parameters.
