pdns/recursordist/docs/dnssec.rst, before:

DNSSEC in the PowerDNS Recursor
===============================
As of 4.0.0, the PowerDNS Recursor has support for DNSSEC processing and experimental support for DNSSEC validation.

.. warning::
  The DNSSEC implementation in the PowerDNS Recursor 4.0.x is known to have deficiencies due to its original design.
  When doing DNSSEC validation, ensure you are running 4.1.0 or later which has a fully reworked (and correct) DNSSEC implementation.

DNSSEC settings
---------------
The PowerDNS Recursor has 5 different levels of DNSSEC processing, which can be set with the :ref:`setting-dnssec` setting in the ``recursor.conf``.
In order from least to most processing, these are:

``off``
^^^^^^^
In this mode, **no** DNSSEC processing takes place.
The PowerDNS Recursor will not set the DNSSEC OK (DO) bit in the outgoing queries and will ignore the DO and AD bits in queries.
In this mode, the behaviour is equal to the PowerDNS Recursor 3.X.

``process-no-validate``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The default mode.

In this mode the Recursor acts as a "security aware, non-validating" nameserver, meaning it will set the DO-bit on outgoing queries and will provide DNSSEC related RRsets (NSEC, RRSIG) to clients that ask for them (by means of a DO-bit in the query), except for zones provided through the ``auth-zones`` setting.
It will not do any validation in this mode, not even when requested by the client.

``process``
^^^^^^^^^^^
When :ref:`setting-dnssec` is set to ``process`` the behaviour is similar to `process-no-validate`_.
However, the recursor will try to validate the data if at least one of the DO or AD bits is set in the query;
in that case, it will set the AD-bit in the response when the data is validated successfully, or send SERVFAIL when the validation comes up bogus.

``log-fail``
^^^^^^^^^^^^
In this mode, the recursor will attempt to validate all data it retrieves from authoritative servers, regardless of the client's DNSSEC desires, and will log the validation result.
This mode can be used to determine the extra load and amount of possibly bogus answers before turning on full-blown validation.
Responses to client queries are the same as with `process`_.

``validate``
^^^^^^^^^^^^
The highest mode of DNSSEC processing.
In this mode, all queries will be be validated and will be answered with a SERVFAIL in case of bogus data, regardless of the client's request.

What, when?
^^^^^^^^^^^
The descriptions above are a bit terse, here's a table describing different scenarios with regards to the ``dnssec`` mode.

+--------------+---------+-------------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|              | ``off`` | ``process-no-validate`` | ``process``   | ``log-fail``  | ``validate``  |
+==============+=========+=========================+===============+===============+===============+
| Perform      | No      | No                      | Only on +AD   | Always (logs  | Always        |
| validation   |         |                         | or +DO from   | result)       |               |
|              |         |                         | client        |               |               |
+--------------+---------+-------------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| SERVFAIL on  | No      | No                      | Only on +AD   | Only on +AD   | Always        |
| bogus        |         |                         | or +DO from   | or +DO from   |               |
|              |         |                         | client        | client        |               |
+--------------+---------+-------------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| AD in        | Never   | Never                   | Only on +AD   | Only on +AD   | Only on +AD   |
| response on  |         |                         | or +DO from   | or +DO from   | or +DO from   |
| authenticate |         |                         | client        | client        | client        |
| d            |         |                         |               |               |               |
| data         |         |                         |               |               |               |
+--------------+---------+-------------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| RRSIGs/NSECs | No      | Yes                     | Yes           | Yes           | Yes           |
| in answer on |         |                         |               |               |               |
| +DO from     |         |                         |               |               |               |
| client       |         |                         |               |               |               |
+--------------+---------+-------------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

**Note**: the ``dig`` tool sets the AD-bit in the query.
This might lead to unexpected query results when testing.
Set ``+noad`` on the ``dig`` commandline when this is the case.

**Note**: the CD-bit is honored correctly for ``process`` and
``validate``. For ``log-fail``, failures will be logged too.

Trust Anchor Management
-----------------------
In the PowerDNS Recursor, both positive and negative trust anchors can be configured during startup (from a persistent configuration file) and at runtime (which is volatile).
However, all trust anchors are configurable.

Trust Anchors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The PowerDNS Recursor ships with the DNSSEC Root key built-in.

**Note**: it has no support for :rfc:`5011` key rollover and does not persist a changed root trust anchor to disk.

Configuring DNSSEC key material must be done in the :ref:`setting-lua-config-file`, using :func:`addTA`.
This function takes 2 arguments: the node in the DNS-tree and the data of the corresponding DS record.

To e.g. add a trust anchor for the root and powerdns.com, use the following config in the Lua file:

.. code:: Lua

    addTA('.', "63149 13 1 a59da3f5c1b97fcd5fa2b3b2b0ac91d38a60d33a") -- This is not an ICANN root
    addTA('powerdns.com', "44030 8 2 D4C3D5552B8679FAEEBC317E5F048B614B2E5F607DC57F1553182D49 AB2179F7")

For PowerDNS Recursor 4.1.x and below, use the :func:`addDS` function instead.

Now (re)start the recursor to load these trust anchors.

Reading trust anchors from files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since version 4.2.0 of the PowerDNS Recursor, it is also possible to read the Trust Anchors from a BIND-style zonefile.
Only the DS and DNSKEY records from this file are read.
Debian and its derivatives ship the ``dns-root-data`` package that contains the DNSSEC root trust anchors in ``/usr/share/dns/root.key``.

To only use the distribution-provided Trust Anchors, add the following to the :ref:`setting-lua-config-file`:

.. sourcecode:: lua

  clearTA() -- Remove built-in trust-anchors
  readTrustAnchorsFromFile("/usr/share/dns/root.key") -- Use these keys

Runtime Configuration of Trust Anchors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
To change or add trust anchors at runtime, use the :doc:`manpages/rec_control.1` tool.
These runtime settings are not saved to disk.
To make them permanent, they should be added to the :ref:`setting-lua-config-file` as described above.

Adding a trust anchor is done with the ``add-ta`` command:

::

    $ rec_control add-ta domain.example 63149 13 1 a59da3f5c1b97fcd5fa2b3b2b0ac91d38a60d33a
    Added Trust Anchor for domain.example. with data 63149 13 1 a59da3f5c1b97fcd5fa2b3b2b0ac91d38a60d33a

To view the currently configured trust anchors, run ``get-tas``:

::

    $ rec_control get-tas
    Configured Trust Anchors:
    .       63149 13 1 a59da3f5c1b97fcd5fa2b3b2b0ac91d38a60d33a
    net.    2574 13 1 a5c5acb889a7ba9b5aa5bef2b0ac9fe1565ddaab

To remove a trust anchor, run ``clear-ta``:

::

    $ rec_control clear-ta domain.example
    Removed Trust Anchor for subdomain.example

**Note**: The root trust anchor cannot be removed in this manner.

.. _ntas:

Negative Trust Anchors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Negative trust anchors (defined in :rfc:`7646`) can be used to temporarily disable DNSSEC validation for a part of the DNS-tree.
This can be done when e.g. a TLD or high-traffic zone goes bogus.
Note that it is good practice to verify that this is indeed the case and not because of malicious actions.

To configure a negative trust anchor, use the ``addNTA()`` function in the :ref:`setting-lua-config-file` and restart the recursor.
This function requires the name of the zone and an optional reason:

.. code-block:: Lua

    addNTA('example.', "Someone messed up the delegation")
    addNTA('powerdns.com') -- No reason given

Runtime Configuration of Negative Trust Anchors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :doc:`manpages/rec_control.1` command can be used to manage the negative trust anchors of a running instance.
These runtime settings are lost when restarting the recursor, more permanent NTAs should be added to the :ref:`setting-lua-config-file` with ``addNTA()``.

Adding a negative trust anchor is done with the ``add-nta`` command (that optionally accepts a reason):

::

    $ rec_control add-nta domain.example botched keyroll
    Added Negative Trust Anchor for domain.example. with reason 'botched keyroll'

To view the currently configured negative trust anchors, run ``get-ntas``:

::

    $ rec_control get-ntas
    Configured Negative Trust Anchors:
    subdomain.example.      Operator failed key-roll
    otherdomain.example.    DS in parent, no DNSKEY in zone

To remove negative trust anchor(s), run ``clear-nta``:

::

    $ rec_control clear-nta subdomain.example
    Removed Negative Trust Anchors for subdomain.example

``clear-nta`` accepts multiple domain-names and accepts '\*' (beware the shell quoting) to remove all negative trust anchors.

Commit message:

rec: automatically reload trust anchors from file
This allows external processec to update TA's without having to restart
the recursor.

pdns/recursordist/docs/dnssec.rst, after:

DNSSEC in the PowerDNS Recursor
===============================
As of 4.0.0, the PowerDNS Recursor has support for DNSSEC processing and experimental support for DNSSEC validation.

.. warning::
  The DNSSEC implementation in the PowerDNS Recursor 4.0.x is known to have deficiencies due to its original design.
  When doing DNSSEC validation, ensure you are running 4.1.0 or later which has a fully reworked (and correct) DNSSEC implementation.

DNSSEC settings
---------------
The PowerDNS Recursor has 5 different levels of DNSSEC processing, which can be set with the :ref:`setting-dnssec` setting in the ``recursor.conf``.
In order from least to most processing, these are:

``off``
^^^^^^^
In this mode, **no** DNSSEC processing takes place.
The PowerDNS Recursor will not set the DNSSEC OK (DO) bit in the outgoing queries and will ignore the DO and AD bits in queries.
In this mode, the behaviour is equal to the PowerDNS Recursor 3.X.

``process-no-validate``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The default mode.

In this mode the Recursor acts as a "security aware, non-validating" nameserver, meaning it will set the DO-bit on outgoing queries and will provide DNSSEC related RRsets (NSEC, RRSIG) to clients that ask for them (by means of a DO-bit in the query), except for zones provided through the ``auth-zones`` setting.
It will not do any validation in this mode, not even when requested by the client.

``process``
^^^^^^^^^^^
When :ref:`setting-dnssec` is set to ``process`` the behaviour is similar to `process-no-validate`_.
However, the recursor will try to validate the data if at least one of the DO or AD bits is set in the query;
in that case, it will set the AD-bit in the response when the data is validated successfully, or send SERVFAIL when the validation comes up bogus.

``log-fail``
^^^^^^^^^^^^
In this mode, the recursor will attempt to validate all data it retrieves from authoritative servers, regardless of the client's DNSSEC desires, and will log the validation result.
This mode can be used to determine the extra load and amount of possibly bogus answers before turning on full-blown validation.
Responses to client queries are the same as with `process`_.

``validate``
^^^^^^^^^^^^
The highest mode of DNSSEC processing.
In this mode, all queries will be be validated and will be answered with a SERVFAIL in case of bogus data, regardless of the client's request.

What, when?
^^^^^^^^^^^
The descriptions above are a bit terse, here's a table describing different scenarios with regards to the ``dnssec`` mode.

+--------------+---------+-------------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|              | ``off`` | ``process-no-validate`` | ``process``   | ``log-fail``  | ``validate``  |
+==============+=========+=========================+===============+===============+===============+
| Perform      | No      | No                      | Only on +AD   | Always (logs  | Always        |
| validation   |         |                         | or +DO from   | result)       |               |
|              |         |                         | client        |               |               |
+--------------+---------+-------------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| SERVFAIL on  | No      | No                      | Only on +AD   | Only on +AD   | Always        |
| bogus        |         |                         | or +DO from   | or +DO from   |               |
|              |         |                         | client        | client        |               |
+--------------+---------+-------------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| AD in        | Never   | Never                   | Only on +AD   | Only on +AD   | Only on +AD   |
| response on  |         |                         | or +DO from   | or +DO from   | or +DO from   |
| authenticate |         |                         | client        | client        | client        |
| d            |         |                         |               |               |               |
| data         |         |                         |               |               |               |
+--------------+---------+-------------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
| RRSIGs/NSECs | No      | Yes                     | Yes           | Yes           | Yes           |
| in answer on |         |                         |               |               |               |
| +DO from     |         |                         |               |               |               |
| client       |         |                         |               |               |               |
+--------------+---------+-------------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

**Note**: the ``dig`` tool sets the AD-bit in the query.
This might lead to unexpected query results when testing.
Set ``+noad`` on the ``dig`` commandline when this is the case.

**Note**: the CD-bit is honored correctly for ``process`` and
``validate``. For ``log-fail``, failures will be logged too.

Trust Anchor Management
-----------------------
In the PowerDNS Recursor, both positive and negative trust anchors can be configured during startup (from a persistent configuration file) and at runtime (which is volatile).
However, all trust anchors are configurable.

Trust Anchors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The PowerDNS Recursor ships with the DNSSEC Root key built-in.

**Note**: it has no support for :rfc:`5011` key rollover and does not persist a changed root trust anchor to disk.

Configuring DNSSEC key material must be done in the :ref:`setting-lua-config-file`, using :func:`addTA`.
This function takes 2 arguments: the node in the DNS-tree and the data of the corresponding DS record.

To e.g. add a trust anchor for the root and powerdns.com, use the following config in the Lua file:

.. code:: Lua

    addTA('.', "63149 13 1 a59da3f5c1b97fcd5fa2b3b2b0ac91d38a60d33a") -- This is not an ICANN root
    addTA('powerdns.com', "44030 8 2 D4C3D5552B8679FAEEBC317E5F048B614B2E5F607DC57F1553182D49 AB2179F7")

For PowerDNS Recursor 4.1.x and below, use the :func:`addDS` function instead.

Now (re)start the recursor to load these trust anchors.

Reading trust anchors from files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since version 4.2.0 of the PowerDNS Recursor, it is also possible to read the Trust Anchors from a BIND-style zonefile.
Only the DS and DNSKEY records from this file are read.
This file is (by default) re-read every 24 hours for updates.
Debian and its derivatives ship the ``dns-root-data`` package that contains the DNSSEC root trust anchors in ``/usr/share/dns/root.key``.

To only use the distribution-provided Trust Anchors, add the following to the :ref:`setting-lua-config-file`:

.. sourcecode:: lua

  clearTA() -- Remove built-in trust-anchors
  readTrustAnchorsFromFile("/usr/share/dns/root.key") -- Use these keys

Runtime Configuration of Trust Anchors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
To change or add trust anchors at runtime, use the :doc:`manpages/rec_control.1` tool.
These runtime settings are not saved to disk.
To make them permanent, they should be added to the :ref:`setting-lua-config-file` as described above.

Adding a trust anchor is done with the ``add-ta`` command:

::

    $ rec_control add-ta domain.example 63149 13 1 a59da3f5c1b97fcd5fa2b3b2b0ac91d38a60d33a
    Added Trust Anchor for domain.example. with data 63149 13 1 a59da3f5c1b97fcd5fa2b3b2b0ac91d38a60d33a

To view the currently configured trust anchors, run ``get-tas``:

::

    $ rec_control get-tas
    Configured Trust Anchors:
    .       63149 13 1 a59da3f5c1b97fcd5fa2b3b2b0ac91d38a60d33a
    net.    2574 13 1 a5c5acb889a7ba9b5aa5bef2b0ac9fe1565ddaab

To remove a trust anchor, run ``clear-ta``:

::

    $ rec_control clear-ta domain.example
    Removed Trust Anchor for subdomain.example

**Note**: The root trust anchor cannot be removed in this manner.

.. _ntas:

Negative Trust Anchors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Negative trust anchors (defined in :rfc:`7646`) can be used to temporarily disable DNSSEC validation for a part of the DNS-tree.
This can be done when e.g. a TLD or high-traffic zone goes bogus.
Note that it is good practice to verify that this is indeed the case and not because of malicious actions.

To configure a negative trust anchor, use the ``addNTA()`` function in the :ref:`setting-lua-config-file` and restart the recursor.
This function requires the name of the zone and an optional reason:

.. code-block:: Lua

    addNTA('example.', "Someone messed up the delegation")
    addNTA('powerdns.com') -- No reason given

Runtime Configuration of Negative Trust Anchors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :doc:`manpages/rec_control.1` command can be used to manage the negative trust anchors of a running instance.
These runtime settings are lost when restarting the recursor, more permanent NTAs should be added to the :ref:`setting-lua-config-file` with ``addNTA()``.

Adding a negative trust anchor is done with the ``add-nta`` command (that optionally accepts a reason):

::

    $ rec_control add-nta domain.example botched keyroll
    Added Negative Trust Anchor for domain.example. with reason 'botched keyroll'

To view the currently configured negative trust anchors, run ``get-ntas``:

::

    $ rec_control get-ntas
    Configured Negative Trust Anchors:
    subdomain.example.      Operator failed key-roll
    otherdomain.example.    DS in parent, no DNSKEY in zone

To remove negative trust anchor(s), run ``clear-nta``:

::

    $ rec_control clear-nta subdomain.example
    Removed Negative Trust Anchors for subdomain.example

``clear-nta`` accepts multiple domain-names and accepts '\*' (beware the shell quoting) to remove all negative trust anchors.
