pdns/recursordist/docs/lua-scripting/dq.rst, before:

The DNSQuestion (``dq``) object
===============================
Apart from the :func:`ipfilter`-function, all functions work on a ``dq`` (DNSQuestion) object.
This object contains details about the current state of the question.
This state can be modified from the various hooks.

The DNSQuestion object contains at least the following fields:

.. class:: DNSQuestion

  An object that contains everything about the current query.
  This object has the following attributes:

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.qname

      :class:`DNSName` of the name this query is for.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.qtype

      Type this query is for as an integer, can be compared against ``pdns.A``, ``pdns.AAAA``.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.rcode

      current DNS Result Code, which can be overridden, including to several magical values
      The rcode can be set to pdns.DROP to drop the query.
      Other statuses are normal DNS return codes, like ``pdns.NOERROR``, ``pdns.NXDOMAIN`` etc.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.isTcp

      Whether the query was received over TCP.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.remoteaddr

      :class:`ComboAddress` of the requestor.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.localaddr

      :class:`ComboAddress` where this query was received on.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.variable

      Boolean which, if set, indicates the recursor should not packet cache this answer.
      Honored even when returning false from a hook!
      Important when providing answers that vary over time or based on sender details.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.followupFunction

      String that signals the nameserver to take one an additional action:

      - followCNAMERecords: When adding a CNAME to the answer, this tells the recursor to follow that CNAME. See :ref:`CNAME Chain Resolution <cnamechainresolution>`
      - getFakeAAAARecords: Get a fake AAAA record, see :doc:`DNS64 <../dns64>`
      - getFakePTRRecords: Get a fake PTR record, see :doc:`DNS64 <../dns64>`
      - udpQueryResponse: Do a UDP query and call a handler, see :ref:`UDP Query Response <udpqueryresponse>`

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy

    The decision that was made by the policy engine, see :ref:`modifyingpolicydecisions`.

    .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyName

      A string with the name of the policy.
      Set by :ref:`policyName <rpz-policyName>` in the :func:`rpzFile` and :func:`rpzMaster` configuration items.
      It is advised to overwrite this when modifying the :attr:`DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyKind`

    .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyAction

        The action taken by the engine

    .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyCustom

        The CNAME content for the ``pdns.policyactions.Custom`` response, a string

    .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyKind

      The kind of policy response, there are several policy kinds:

      -  ``pdns.policykinds.Custom`` will return a NoError, CNAME answer with the value specified in :attr:`DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyCustom`
      -  ``pdns.policykinds.Drop`` will simply cause the query to be dropped
      -  ``pdns.policykinds.NoAction`` will continue normal processing of the query
      -  ``pdns.policykinds.NODATA`` will return a NoError response with no value in the answer section
      -  ``pdns.policykinds.NXDOMAIN`` will return a response with a NXDomain rcode
      -  ``pdns.policykinds.Truncate`` will return a NoError, no answer, truncated response over UDP. Normal processing will continue over TCP

    .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyTTL

        The TTL in seconds for the ``pdns.policyactions.Custom`` response

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.wantsRPZ

      A boolean that indicates the use of the Policy Engine.
      Can be set to ``false`` in ``prerpz`` to disable RPZ for this query.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.data

      A Lua object reference that is persistent throughout the lifetime of the :class:`DNSQuestion` object for a single query.
      It can be used to store custom data.
      Most scripts initialise this to an empty table early on so they can store multiple items.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.requestorId

      .. versionadded:: 4.1.0

      A string that will be used to set the ``requestorId`` field in :doc:`protobuf <../lua-config/protobuf>` messages.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.deviceId

      .. versionadded:: 4.1.0

      A string that will be used to set the ``deviceId`` field in :doc:`protobuf <../lua-config/protobuf>` messages.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.udpAnswer

      Answer to the :attr:`udpQuery <DNSQuestion.udpQuery>` when when using the ``udpQueryResponse`` :attr:`followupFunction <DNSQuestion.followupFunction>`.
      Only filled when the call-back function is invoked.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.udpQueryDest

      Destination IP address to send the UDP packet to when using the ``udpQueryResponse`` :attr:`followupFunction <DNSQuestion.followupFunction>`

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.udpQuery

      The content of the UDP payload when using the ``udpQueryResponse`` :attr:`followupFunction <DNSQuestion.followupFunction>`

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.udpCallback

      The name of the callback function that is called when using the ``udpQueryResponse`` :attr:`followupFunction <DNSQuestion.followupFunction>` when an answer is received.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.validationState

      .. versionadded:: 4.1.0

      The result of the DNSSEC validation, accessible from the ``postresolve``, ``nxdomain`` and ``nodata`` hooks.
      Possible states are ``pdns.validationstates.Indeterminate``, ``pdns.validationstates.Bogus``, ``pdns.validationstates.Insecure`` and ``pdns.validationstates.Secure``.
      The result will always be ``pdns.validationstates.Indeterminate`` is validation is disabled or was not requested.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.logResponse

      .. versionadded:: 4.2.0

      Whether the response to this query will be exported to a remote protobuf logger, if one has been configured.

  It also supports the following methods:

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:addAnswer(type, content, [ttl, name])

     Add an answer to the record of ``type`` with ``content``.

     :param int type: The type of record to add, can be ``pdns.AAAA`` etc.
     :param str content: The content of the record, will be parsed into wireformat based on the ``type``
     :param int ttl: The TTL in seconds for this record, defaults to 3600
     :param DNSName name: The name of this record, defaults to :attr:`DNSQuestion.qname`

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:addRecord(type, content, place, [ttl, name])

     Add a record of ``type`` with ``content`` in section ``place``.

     :param int type: The type of record to add, can be ``pdns.AAAA`` etc.
     :param str content: The content of the record, will be parsed into wireformat based on the ``type``
     :param int place: The section to place the record, see :attr:`DNSRecord.place`
     :param int ttl: The TTL in seconds for this record, defaults to 3600
     :param DNSName name: The name of this record, defaults to :attr:`DNSQuestion.qname`

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:addPolicyTag(tag)

     Add a policy tag.

     :param str tag: The tag to add

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:discardPolicy(policyname)

     Skip the filtering policy (for example RPZ) named ``policyname`` for this query.
     This is mostly useful in the ``prerpz`` hook.

     :param str policyname: The name of the policy to ignore.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getDH() -> DNSHeader

      Returns the :class:`DNSHeader` of the query or nil.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getPolicyTags() -> {str}

      Get the current policy tags as a table of strings.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getRecords() -> {DNSRecord}

      Get a table of DNS Records in this DNS Question (or answer by now).

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:setPolicyTags(tags)

      Set the policy tags to ``tags``, overwriting any existing policy tags.

      :param {str} tags: The policy tags

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:setRecords(records)

      After your edits, update the answers of this question

      :param {DNSRecord} records: The records to put in the packet

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getEDNSFlag(name) -> bool

      Returns true if the EDNS flag with ``name`` is set in the query.

      :param string name: Name of the flag.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getEDNSFlags() -> {str}

      Returns a list of strings with all the EDNS flag mnemonics in the query.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getEDNSOption(num) -> str

      Get the EDNS Option with number ``num`` as a bytestring.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getEDNSOptions() -> {str: str}

      Get a map of all EDNS Options

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getEDNSSubnet() -> Netmask

      Returns the :class:`Netmask` specified in the EDNSSubnet option, or empty if there was none.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:addPolicyTag(tag)

      Add policyTag ``tag`` to the list of policyTags

      :param str tag: The tag to add

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getPolicyTags() -> {str}

      Get a list the policyTags for this message.

DNSHeader Object
================

The DNS header as returned by :meth:`DNSQuestion:getDH()` represents a header of a DNS message.

.. class:: DNSHeader

    represents a header of a DNS message.

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getRD() -> bool

      The value of the Recursion Desired bit.

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getAA() -> bool

      The value of the Authoritative Answer bit.

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getAD() -> bool

      The value of the Authenticated Data bit.

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getCD() -> bool

      The value of the Checking Disabled bit.

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getTC() -> bool

      The value of the Truncation bit.

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getRCODE() -> int

      The Response Code of the query

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getOPCODE() -> int

      The Operation Code of the query

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getID() -> int

      The ID of the query

The EDNSOptionView Class
========================

.. class:: EDNSOptionView

  An object that represents the values of a single EDNS option

  .. method:: EDNSOptionView:count()
     .. versionadded:: 4.2.0

    The number of values for this EDNS option.

  .. method:: EDNSOptionView:getValues()
     .. versionadded:: 4.2.0

    Return a table of NULL-safe strings values for this EDNS option.

  .. attribute:: EDNSOptionView.size

    The size in bytes of the first value of this EDNS option.

  .. method:: EDNSOptionView:getContent()

    Returns a NULL-safe string object of the first value of this EDNS option.

Commit message:

recursor: add new deviceName field to the dnsmessage protobuf export

pdns/recursordist/docs/lua-scripting/dq.rst, after:

The DNSQuestion (``dq``) object
===============================
Apart from the :func:`ipfilter`-function, all functions work on a ``dq`` (DNSQuestion) object.
This object contains details about the current state of the question.
This state can be modified from the various hooks.

The DNSQuestion object contains at least the following fields:

.. class:: DNSQuestion

  An object that contains everything about the current query.
  This object has the following attributes:

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.qname

      :class:`DNSName` of the name this query is for.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.qtype

      Type this query is for as an integer, can be compared against ``pdns.A``, ``pdns.AAAA``.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.rcode

      current DNS Result Code, which can be overridden, including to several magical values
      The rcode can be set to pdns.DROP to drop the query.
      Other statuses are normal DNS return codes, like ``pdns.NOERROR``, ``pdns.NXDOMAIN`` etc.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.isTcp

      Whether the query was received over TCP.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.remoteaddr

      :class:`ComboAddress` of the requestor.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.localaddr

      :class:`ComboAddress` where this query was received on.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.variable

      Boolean which, if set, indicates the recursor should not packet cache this answer.
      Honored even when returning false from a hook!
      Important when providing answers that vary over time or based on sender details.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.followupFunction

      String that signals the nameserver to take one an additional action:

      - followCNAMERecords: When adding a CNAME to the answer, this tells the recursor to follow that CNAME. See :ref:`CNAME Chain Resolution <cnamechainresolution>`
      - getFakeAAAARecords: Get a fake AAAA record, see :doc:`DNS64 <../dns64>`
      - getFakePTRRecords: Get a fake PTR record, see :doc:`DNS64 <../dns64>`
      - udpQueryResponse: Do a UDP query and call a handler, see :ref:`UDP Query Response <udpqueryresponse>`

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy

    The decision that was made by the policy engine, see :ref:`modifyingpolicydecisions`.

    .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyName

      A string with the name of the policy.
      Set by :ref:`policyName <rpz-policyName>` in the :func:`rpzFile` and :func:`rpzMaster` configuration items.
      It is advised to overwrite this when modifying the :attr:`DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyKind`

    .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyAction

        The action taken by the engine

    .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyCustom

        The CNAME content for the ``pdns.policyactions.Custom`` response, a string

    .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyKind

      The kind of policy response, there are several policy kinds:

      -  ``pdns.policykinds.Custom`` will return a NoError, CNAME answer with the value specified in :attr:`DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyCustom`
      -  ``pdns.policykinds.Drop`` will simply cause the query to be dropped
      -  ``pdns.policykinds.NoAction`` will continue normal processing of the query
      -  ``pdns.policykinds.NODATA`` will return a NoError response with no value in the answer section
      -  ``pdns.policykinds.NXDOMAIN`` will return a response with a NXDomain rcode
      -  ``pdns.policykinds.Truncate`` will return a NoError, no answer, truncated response over UDP. Normal processing will continue over TCP

    .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.appliedPolicy.policyTTL

        The TTL in seconds for the ``pdns.policyactions.Custom`` response

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.wantsRPZ

      A boolean that indicates the use of the Policy Engine.
      Can be set to ``false`` in ``prerpz`` to disable RPZ for this query.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.data

      A Lua object reference that is persistent throughout the lifetime of the :class:`DNSQuestion` object for a single query.
      It can be used to store custom data.
      Most scripts initialise this to an empty table early on so they can store multiple items.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.requestorId

      .. versionadded:: 4.1.0

      A string that will be used to set the ``requestorId`` field in :doc:`protobuf <../lua-config/protobuf>` messages.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.deviceId

      .. versionadded:: 4.1.0

      A string that will be used to set the ``deviceId`` field in :doc:`protobuf <../lua-config/protobuf>` messages.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.deviceName

      .. versionadded:: 4.1.15

      A string that will be used to set the ``deviceName`` field in :doc:`protobuf <../lua-config/protobuf>` messages.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.udpAnswer

      Answer to the :attr:`udpQuery <DNSQuestion.udpQuery>` when when using the ``udpQueryResponse`` :attr:`followupFunction <DNSQuestion.followupFunction>`.
      Only filled when the call-back function is invoked.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.udpQueryDest

      Destination IP address to send the UDP packet to when using the ``udpQueryResponse`` :attr:`followupFunction <DNSQuestion.followupFunction>`

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.udpQuery

      The content of the UDP payload when using the ``udpQueryResponse`` :attr:`followupFunction <DNSQuestion.followupFunction>`

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.udpCallback

      The name of the callback function that is called when using the ``udpQueryResponse`` :attr:`followupFunction <DNSQuestion.followupFunction>` when an answer is received.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.validationState

      .. versionadded:: 4.1.0

      The result of the DNSSEC validation, accessible from the ``postresolve``, ``nxdomain`` and ``nodata`` hooks.
      Possible states are ``pdns.validationstates.Indeterminate``, ``pdns.validationstates.Bogus``, ``pdns.validationstates.Insecure`` and ``pdns.validationstates.Secure``.
      The result will always be ``pdns.validationstates.Indeterminate`` is validation is disabled or was not requested.

  .. attribute:: DNSQuestion.logResponse

      .. versionadded:: 4.2.0

      Whether the response to this query will be exported to a remote protobuf logger, if one has been configured.

  It also supports the following methods:

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:addAnswer(type, content, [ttl, name])

     Add an answer to the record of ``type`` with ``content``.

     :param int type: The type of record to add, can be ``pdns.AAAA`` etc.
     :param str content: The content of the record, will be parsed into wireformat based on the ``type``
     :param int ttl: The TTL in seconds for this record, defaults to 3600
     :param DNSName name: The name of this record, defaults to :attr:`DNSQuestion.qname`

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:addRecord(type, content, place, [ttl, name])

     Add a record of ``type`` with ``content`` in section ``place``.

     :param int type: The type of record to add, can be ``pdns.AAAA`` etc.
     :param str content: The content of the record, will be parsed into wireformat based on the ``type``
     :param int place: The section to place the record, see :attr:`DNSRecord.place`
     :param int ttl: The TTL in seconds for this record, defaults to 3600
     :param DNSName name: The name of this record, defaults to :attr:`DNSQuestion.qname`

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:addPolicyTag(tag)

     Add a policy tag.

     :param str tag: The tag to add

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:discardPolicy(policyname)

     Skip the filtering policy (for example RPZ) named ``policyname`` for this query.
     This is mostly useful in the ``prerpz`` hook.

     :param str policyname: The name of the policy to ignore.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getDH() -> DNSHeader

      Returns the :class:`DNSHeader` of the query or nil.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getPolicyTags() -> {str}

      Get the current policy tags as a table of strings.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getRecords() -> {DNSRecord}

      Get a table of DNS Records in this DNS Question (or answer by now).

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:setPolicyTags(tags)

      Set the policy tags to ``tags``, overwriting any existing policy tags.

      :param {str} tags: The policy tags

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:setRecords(records)

      After your edits, update the answers of this question

      :param {DNSRecord} records: The records to put in the packet

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getEDNSFlag(name) -> bool

      Returns true if the EDNS flag with ``name`` is set in the query.

      :param string name: Name of the flag.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getEDNSFlags() -> {str}

      Returns a list of strings with all the EDNS flag mnemonics in the query.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getEDNSOption(num) -> str

      Get the EDNS Option with number ``num`` as a bytestring.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getEDNSOptions() -> {str: str}

      Get a map of all EDNS Options

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getEDNSSubnet() -> Netmask

      Returns the :class:`Netmask` specified in the EDNSSubnet option, or empty if there was none.

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:addPolicyTag(tag)

      Add policyTag ``tag`` to the list of policyTags

      :param str tag: The tag to add

  .. method:: DNSQuestion:getPolicyTags() -> {str}

      Get a list the policyTags for this message.

DNSHeader Object
================

The DNS header as returned by :meth:`DNSQuestion:getDH()` represents a header of a DNS message.

.. class:: DNSHeader

    represents a header of a DNS message.

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getRD() -> bool

      The value of the Recursion Desired bit.

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getAA() -> bool

      The value of the Authoritative Answer bit.

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getAD() -> bool

      The value of the Authenticated Data bit.

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getCD() -> bool

      The value of the Checking Disabled bit.

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getTC() -> bool

      The value of the Truncation bit.

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getRCODE() -> int

      The Response Code of the query

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getOPCODE() -> int

      The Operation Code of the query

  .. method:: DNSHeader:getID() -> int

      The ID of the query

The EDNSOptionView Class
========================

.. class:: EDNSOptionView

  An object that represents the values of a single EDNS option

  .. method:: EDNSOptionView:count()
     .. versionadded:: 4.2.0

    The number of values for this EDNS option.

  .. method:: EDNSOptionView:getValues()
     .. versionadded:: 4.2.0

    Return a table of NULL-safe strings values for this EDNS option.

  .. attribute:: EDNSOptionView.size

    The size in bytes of the first value of this EDNS option.

  .. method:: EDNSOptionView:getContent()

    Returns a NULL-safe string object of the first value of this EDNS option.
