pdns/recursordist/docs/lua-config/dnssec.rst, before:

Managing DNSSEC Trust Anchors in the Lua Configuration
======================================================
The DNSSEC Trust Anchors and Negative Trust Anchors must be stored in the Lua Configuration file.
See the :doc:`../dnssec` for all information about DNSSEC in the PowerDNS Recursor.
This page only documents the Lua functions for DNSSEC configuration

.. function:: addTA(name, dscontent)

  .. versionadded:: 4.2.0

  Adds Trust Anchor to the list of DNSSEC anchors.

  :param str name: The name in the DNS tree from where this Trust Anchor should be used
  :param str dsrecord: The DS Record content associated with ``name``

.. function:: clearTA([name])

  .. versionadded:: 4.2.0

  Remove Trust Anchors for a name from the list of configured trust anchors. When ``name`` is
  not given, remove *all* trust anchors instead.

  :param str name: The name in the DNS tree for which the Trust Anchors should be removed.

.. function:: addDS(name, dscontent)

  .. deprecated:: 4.2.0
    Please use :func:`addTA` instead

  Adds a DS record (Trust Anchor) to the configuration

  :param str name: The name in the DNS tree from where this Trust Anchor should be used
  :param str dsrecord: The DS Record content associated with ``name``

.. function:: clearDS([name])

  .. deprecated:: 4.2.0
    Please use :func:`clearTA` instead

  Remove Trust Anchors for a name from the list of configured trust anchors. When ``name`` is
  not given, remove *all* trust anchors instead.

  :param str name: The name in the DNS tree for which the Trust Anchors should be removed.

.. function:: addNTA(name[, reason])

  Adds a Negative Trust Anchor for ``name`` to the configuration.
  Please read :ref:`ntas` for operational information on NTAs.

  :param str name: The name in the DNS tree from where this NTA should be used
  :param str reason: An optional comment to add to this NTA

.. function:: clearNTA([name])

  Remove Negative Trust Anchor for ``name`` from the list of configured trust anchors. When ``name`` is
  not given, remove *all* negative trust anchors instead.

  :param str name: The name in the DNS tree from where this NTA should be removed

.. function:: readTrustAnchorsFromFile(fname)

  .. versionadded:: 4.2.0

  Reads all DS and DNSKEY records from ``fname`` (a BIND zone file) and adds these to the Trust Anchors.
  This function can be used to read distribution provided trust anchors, as for instance ``/usr/share/dns/root.key`` from Debian's ``dns-root-data`` package.

  :param str fname: Path to a zone file with Trust Anchors

Commit message:

rec: automatically reload trust anchors from file
This allows external processec to update TA's without having to restart
the recursor.

pdns/recursordist/docs/lua-config/dnssec.rst, after:

Managing DNSSEC Trust Anchors in the Lua Configuration
======================================================
The DNSSEC Trust Anchors and Negative Trust Anchors must be stored in the Lua Configuration file.
See the :doc:`../dnssec` for all information about DNSSEC in the PowerDNS Recursor.
This page only documents the Lua functions for DNSSEC configuration

.. function:: addTA(name, dscontent)

  .. versionadded:: 4.2.0

  Adds Trust Anchor to the list of DNSSEC anchors.

  :param str name: The name in the DNS tree from where this Trust Anchor should be used
  :param str dsrecord: The DS Record content associated with ``name``

.. function:: clearTA([name])

  .. versionadded:: 4.2.0

  Remove Trust Anchors for a name from the list of configured trust anchors. When ``name`` is
  not given, remove *all* trust anchors instead.

  :param str name: The name in the DNS tree for which the Trust Anchors should be removed.

.. function:: addDS(name, dscontent)

  .. deprecated:: 4.2.0
    Please use :func:`addTA` instead

  Adds a DS record (Trust Anchor) to the configuration

  :param str name: The name in the DNS tree from where this Trust Anchor should be used
  :param str dsrecord: The DS Record content associated with ``name``

.. function:: clearDS([name])

  .. deprecated:: 4.2.0
    Please use :func:`clearTA` instead

  Remove Trust Anchors for a name from the list of configured trust anchors. When ``name`` is
  not given, remove *all* trust anchors instead.

  :param str name: The name in the DNS tree for which the Trust Anchors should be removed.

.. function:: addNTA(name[, reason])

  Adds a Negative Trust Anchor for ``name`` to the configuration.
  Please read :ref:`ntas` for operational information on NTAs.

  :param str name: The name in the DNS tree from where this NTA should be used
  :param str reason: An optional comment to add to this NTA

.. function:: clearNTA([name])

  Remove Negative Trust Anchor for ``name`` from the list of configured trust anchors. When ``name`` is
  not given, remove *all* negative trust anchors instead.

  :param str name: The name in the DNS tree from where this NTA should be removed

.. function:: readTrustAnchorsFromFile(fname[, interval])

  .. versionadded:: 4.2.0

  Reads all DS and DNSKEY records from ``fname`` (a BIND zone file) and adds these to the Trust Anchors.
  This function can be used to read distribution provided trust anchors, as for instance ``/usr/share/dns/root.key`` from Debian's ``dns-root-data`` package.

  :param str fname: Path to a zone file with Trust Anchors
  :param int interval: Re-read this file every ``interval`` hours. By default this is set to 24. Set to 0 to disable automatic re-reads.
