docs/catalog.rst, before:

Catalog Zones (RFC 9432)
========================

Starting with the PowerDNS Authoritative Server 4.7.0, catalog zone support is available.

Supported catalog versions
--------------------------

+-----------------+----------+----------+
| Catalog version | Producer | Consumer |
+=================+==========+==========+
| 1 (ISC)         | No       | Yes      |
+-----------------+----------+----------+
| 2 (:rfc:`9432`) | Yes      | Yes      |
+-----------------+----------+----------+

All the important features of catalog zones version "2" are supported.
There are however a few properties where support is limited:

-  There is no support for group templates on consumers;
-  There is no support for custom extensions;

The implementation requires the backend to support a number of new operations.
Currently, the following backends have been modified to support catalog zones:

- :doc:`gmysql <backends/generic-mysql>`
- :doc:`gpgsql <backends/generic-postgresql>`
- :doc:`gsqlite3 <backends/generic-sqlite3>`
- :doc:`godbc <backends/generic-odbc>`
- :doc:`lmdb <backends/lmdb>`

.. _catalog-configuration-options:

Configuration options
---------------------

None really.

.. _catalog-metadata:

Per zone settings
-----------------

It is highly recommended to protect catalog zones with :doc:`TSIG <../tsig>`.

CATALOG-HASH
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Producer zones store the member state as a hash in this metadata setting.
This setting is managed by the authoritative server.
Modifying or deleting this value will result in a serial increase of the producer zone and the update or recreation of this value.

Setting up catalog zones
------------------------

.. note::
  Catalog zone specification and operation is described in :rfc:`9432`.

Setting up a producer zone
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Setting up a producer zone is not very different from a regular primary zone.
A producer zone is a minimal zone of type PRODUCER with only SOA and NS records at apex.
All the records in a producer zone are ignored while generating a catalog.

An initial producer zone may look like this:

::

  $TTL 3600
  $ORIGIN catalog.example.
  @               IN      SOA     invalid. hostmaster.invalid. (
                          1     ; serial
                          1H    ; refresh
                          10M   ; retry
                          1W    ; expire
                          1800  ; negTTL
                          )

  @               IN      NS      invalid.

An interesting detail is the SOA serial:
since the serial of a producer zone is automatically updated, it is important for the initial serial to be equal or lower than epoch.
This serial is increased to EPOCH after each relevant member update.

Create a producer zone:

.. code-block:: shell

  pdnsutil load-zone catalog.example ZONEFILE
  pdnsutil set-kind catalog.example producer

Creating producer zones is supported in the :doc:`API <http-api/zone>`, using type ``PRODUCER``.

Assigning members to a producer zone
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After the producer zone is created it is necessary to assign member zones to it.
In the example below ``example.com`` is the member and ``catalog.example`` is the catalog.

.. code-block:: shell

  pdnsutil set-catalog example.com catalog.example
  pdnsutil set-kind example.com primary

Setting catalog values is supported in the :doc:`API <http-api/zone>`, by setting the ``catalog`` property in the zone properties.
Setting the catalog to an empty ``""`` removes the member zone from the catalog it is in.

Each member zone may have one or more additional properties as defined in the RFC.
PowerDNS currently supports the following properties:

- coo - A single DNSName
- group - Multiple string values for group are allowed

.. code-block:: shell

  pdnsutil set-option example.com producer coo other-catalog.example
  pdnsutil set-option example.com producer group pdns-group-x pdns-group-y

There is also an option to set a specific <unique-N> value for a zone. This is done by setting a the ``unique`` value.
This is used to signal a state reset to the consumer.
The value for ``unique`` is a single DNS label.

.. code-block:: shell

  pdnsutil --config-dir=. --config-name=gmysql set-option test.com producer unique 123

Setting options is not yet supported in the API.

Setting up a consumer zone
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Setting up a consumer zone on a secondary server is almost identical to a normal secondary zone.
The only difference is the type, which is now set to CONSUMER.

.. code-block:: shell

  pdnsutil create-secondary-zone catalog.example 192.0.2.42
  pdnsutil set-kind catalog.example consumer

Creating consumer zones is supported in the :doc:`API <http-api/zone>`, using type ``CONSUMER``.

New member zones on the consumer adopt their primaries from the consumer zone.

Updating a secondary server when primary address/port changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If NOTIFY+AXFR are being used to replicate zone changes between the
primary and secondary servers, and the address and/or port of the
primary server changes, two steps are necessary on each secondary
server in order to fully apply the changes.

.. code-block:: shell

  pdnsutil change-secondary-zone-primary catalog.example 192.0.2.45
  pdns_control retrieve catalog.example

This will update the primary server contact details in each zone
included in the catalog zone.

Commit message:

document current views/catz interaction situation
Signed-off-by: Peter van Dijk <peter.van.dijk@powerdns.com>

docs/catalog.rst, after:

Catalog Zones (RFC 9432)
========================

Starting with the PowerDNS Authoritative Server 4.7.0, catalog zone support is available.

Supported catalog versions
--------------------------

+-----------------+----------+----------+
| Catalog version | Producer | Consumer |
+=================+==========+==========+
| 1 (ISC)         | No       | Yes      |
+-----------------+----------+----------+
| 2 (:rfc:`9432`) | Yes      | Yes      |
+-----------------+----------+----------+

All the important features of catalog zones version "2" are supported.
There are however a few properties where support is limited:

-  There is no support for group templates on consumers;
-  There is no support for custom extensions;

The implementation requires the backend to support a number of new operations.
Currently, the following backends have been modified to support catalog zones:

- :doc:`gmysql <backends/generic-mysql>`
- :doc:`gpgsql <backends/generic-postgresql>`
- :doc:`gsqlite3 <backends/generic-sqlite3>`
- :doc:`godbc <backends/generic-odbc>`
- :doc:`lmdb <backends/lmdb>`

If you are also using views, please read :ref:`views-catalog-zones` in the Views documentation.

.. _catalog-configuration-options:

Configuration options
---------------------

None really.

.. _catalog-metadata:

Per zone settings
-----------------

It is highly recommended to protect catalog zones with :doc:`TSIG <../tsig>`.

CATALOG-HASH
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Producer zones store the member state as a hash in this metadata setting.
This setting is managed by the authoritative server.
Modifying or deleting this value will result in a serial increase of the producer zone and the update or recreation of this value.

Setting up catalog zones
------------------------

.. note::
  Catalog zone specification and operation is described in :rfc:`9432`.

Setting up a producer zone
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Setting up a producer zone is not very different from a regular primary zone.
A producer zone is a minimal zone of type PRODUCER with only SOA and NS records at apex.
All the records in a producer zone are ignored while generating a catalog.

An initial producer zone may look like this:

::

  $TTL 3600
  $ORIGIN catalog.example.
  @               IN      SOA     invalid. hostmaster.invalid. (
                          1     ; serial
                          1H    ; refresh
                          10M   ; retry
                          1W    ; expire
                          1800  ; negTTL
                          )

  @               IN      NS      invalid.

An interesting detail is the SOA serial:
since the serial of a producer zone is automatically updated, it is important for the initial serial to be equal or lower than epoch.
This serial is increased to EPOCH after each relevant member update.

Create a producer zone:

.. code-block:: shell

  pdnsutil load-zone catalog.example ZONEFILE
  pdnsutil set-kind catalog.example producer

Creating producer zones is supported in the :doc:`API <http-api/zone>`, using type ``PRODUCER``.

Assigning members to a producer zone
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After the producer zone is created it is necessary to assign member zones to it.
In the example below ``example.com`` is the member and ``catalog.example`` is the catalog.

.. code-block:: shell

  pdnsutil set-catalog example.com catalog.example
  pdnsutil set-kind example.com primary

Setting catalog values is supported in the :doc:`API <http-api/zone>`, by setting the ``catalog`` property in the zone properties.
Setting the catalog to an empty ``""`` removes the member zone from the catalog it is in.

Each member zone may have one or more additional properties as defined in the RFC.
PowerDNS currently supports the following properties:

- coo - A single DNSName
- group - Multiple string values for group are allowed

.. code-block:: shell

  pdnsutil set-option example.com producer coo other-catalog.example
  pdnsutil set-option example.com producer group pdns-group-x pdns-group-y

There is also an option to set a specific <unique-N> value for a zone. This is done by setting a the ``unique`` value.
This is used to signal a state reset to the consumer.
The value for ``unique`` is a single DNS label.

.. code-block:: shell

  pdnsutil --config-dir=. --config-name=gmysql set-option test.com producer unique 123

Setting options is not yet supported in the API.

Setting up a consumer zone
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Setting up a consumer zone on a secondary server is almost identical to a normal secondary zone.
The only difference is the type, which is now set to CONSUMER.

.. code-block:: shell

  pdnsutil create-secondary-zone catalog.example 192.0.2.42
  pdnsutil set-kind catalog.example consumer

Creating consumer zones is supported in the :doc:`API <http-api/zone>`, using type ``CONSUMER``.

New member zones on the consumer adopt their primaries from the consumer zone.

Updating a secondary server when primary address/port changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If NOTIFY+AXFR are being used to replicate zone changes between the
primary and secondary servers, and the address and/or port of the
primary server changes, two steps are necessary on each secondary
server in order to fully apply the changes.

.. code-block:: shell

  pdnsutil change-secondary-zone-primary catalog.example 192.0.2.45
  pdns_control retrieve catalog.example

This will update the primary server contact details in each zone
included in the catalog zone.
