pdns/recursordist/docs/appendices/structuredlogging.rst, before:

Structured Logging Dictionary
=============================

This page describes the common entries of the Structured Logging component.
Currently :ref:`setting-structured-logging-backend` can have these values:

- The ``default`` text based backend
- The ``systemd-journal`` backend
- The ``json`` backend (added in version 5.1.0).

The ``default`` backend
-----------------------
The default backend uses a text representation of the key-value pairs.
A line is constructed by appending all key-value pairs as ``key="value"``, separated by spaces.
The output is written by passing the resulting text line to the standard error stream and also to ``syslog`` if :ref:`setting-disable-syslog` is false.
Depending on the value of :ref:`setting-log-timestamp` a timestamp is prepended to the log line.

An example line (including prepended timestamp) looks like this::

  Oct 18 08:45:21 msg="Raised soft limit on number of filedescriptors to match max-mthreads and threads settings" subsystem="config" level="0" prio="Warning" tid="0" ts="1697611521.119" limit="6469"

- Key names are not quoted.
- Values are quoted with double quotes.
- If a value contains a double quote, it is escaped with a backslash.
- Backslashes in the value are escaped by prepending a backslash.

The following keys are always present:

+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| **Key**     | **Type**         | **Example**                          | **Remarks**                           |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``msg``      |``string``        | ``"Launching distributor threads"``  |Value is the same for all instances of |
|             |                  |                                      |this log entry, together with          |
|             |                  |                                      |``subsystem`` it uniquely identifies   |
|             |                  |                                      |the log message.                       |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``subsystem``|``string``        |``"incoming"``                        |Uniquely identifies the log            |
|             |                  |                                      |entry together with the value of       |
|             |                  |                                      |``msg``.                               |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``level``   |``number``        |``"0"``                               |The detail level of the log entry, do  |
|             |                  |                                      |not confuse with                       |
|             |                  |                                      |:ref:`setting-loglevel`. Not actively  |
|             |                  |                                      |used currently.                        |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``prio``    |``enum``          |``"Notice"``                          |One of ``Alert=1``, ``Critical=2``,    |
|             |                  |                                      |``Error=3``, ``Warning=4``,            |
|             |                  |                                      |``Notice=5``, ``Info=6``,              |
|             |                  |                                      |``Debug=7``. A log entry will only     |
|             |                  |                                      |produced if its ``prio`` is equal or   |
|             |                  |                                      |lower than :ref:`setting-loglevel`.    |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``tid``     |``number``        |``"2"``                               |The Posix worker thread id that        |
|             |                  |                                      |produced the log entry. If not produced|
|             |                  |                                      |by a worker thread, the value is zero. |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``ts``      |``number``        |``"1697614303.039"``                  |Number of seconds since the Unix epoch,|
|             |                  |                                      |including fractional part.             |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+

A log entry can also have zero or more additional key-value pairs. Common keys are:

+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| **Key**     | **Type**            |**Example**                           | **Remarks**                           |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``error``    |``string``           |``"No such file or directory"``       |An error cause.                        |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``address``  |``ip address:port``  |``"[::]:5301"``                       |An IP: port combination.               |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``addresses``|``list of subnets``  |``"127.0.0.0/8 ::ffff:0:0/96"``       |A list of subnets, space separated.    |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``path``     |``filesystem path``  |``"tmp/api-dir/apizones"``            |                                       |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``proto``    |``string``           |``"udp"``                             |                                       |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``qname``    |``DNS name``         |``"example.com"``                     |                                       |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``qtype``    |``DNS Query Type``   |``"AAAA"``                            |Text representation of DNS query type. |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``rcode``   |``DNS Response Code``|``"3"``                               |Numeric DNS response code              |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``mtid``     |``Number``           |``"234"``                             |The id of the MThread that produced the|
|             |                     |                                      |log entry.                             |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+

The ``systemd-journal`` backend
-------------------------------
The ``systemd-journal`` structured logging backend uses mostly the same keys and values as the default backend, with the exceptions:

- keys are capitalized as required for ``systemd-journal``.
- ``msg`` is translated to ``MESSAGE``.
- ``prio`` is translated to ``PRIORITY``.
- ``ts`` is translated to ``TIMESTAMP``.
- If the original key is in a list of keys special to ``systemd-journal``, it is capitalized and prepended by ``PDNS_``.
  The list of special keys is: message, message_id, priority, code_file, code_line, code_func, errno, invocation_id, user_invocation_id, syslog_facility, syslog_identifier, syslog_pid, syslog_timestamp, syslog_raw, documentation, tid, unit, user_unit, object_pid.

To use this logging backend, add the ``--structured-logging-backend=systemd-journal`` to the command line in the systemd unit file.
Note that adding it to the recursor configuration file does not work as expected, as this file is processed after the logging has been set up.

To query the log, use a command similar to::

  # journalctl -r -n 1 -o json-pretty -u pdns-recursor.service

The ``json`` backend
--------------------
The ``json`` structured logging backend has been added in version 5.1.0 and uses the same keys and values as the default backend.
An example of a log object::

    {"level": "0", "limit": "10765", "msg": "Raised soft limit on number of filedescriptors to match max-mthreads and threads settings", "priority": "4", "subsystem": "config", "tid": "0", "ts": "1709285994.851"}

All values are represented as strings.

The JSON log objects are written to the standard error stream.

Commit message:

Change references form old style to YAML setting in docs

pdns/recursordist/docs/appendices/structuredlogging.rst, after:

Structured Logging Dictionary
=============================

This page describes the common entries of the Structured Logging component.
Currently :ref:`setting-yaml-logging.structured_logging_backend` can have these values:

- The ``default`` text based backend
- The ``systemd-journal`` backend
- The ``json`` backend (added in version 5.1.0).

The ``default`` backend
-----------------------
The default backend uses a text representation of the key-value pairs.
A line is constructed by appending all key-value pairs as ``key="value"``, separated by spaces.
The output is written by passing the resulting text line to the standard error stream and also to ``syslog`` if :ref:`setting-yaml-logging.disable_syslog` is false.
Depending on the value of :ref:`setting-yaml-logging.timestamp` a timestamp is prepended to the log line.

An example line (including prepended timestamp) looks like this::

  Oct 18 08:45:21 msg="Raised soft limit on number of filedescriptors to match max-mthreads and threads settings" subsystem="config" level="0" prio="Warning" tid="0" ts="1697611521.119" limit="6469"

- Key names are not quoted.
- Values are quoted with double quotes.
- If a value contains a double quote, it is escaped with a backslash.
- Backslashes in the value are escaped by prepending a backslash.

The following keys are always present:

+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| **Key**     | **Type**         | **Example**                          | **Remarks**                           |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``msg``      |``string``        | ``"Launching distributor threads"``  |Value is the same for all instances of |
|             |                  |                                      |this log entry, together with          |
|             |                  |                                      |``subsystem`` it uniquely identifies   |
|             |                  |                                      |the log message.                       |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``subsystem``|``string``        |``"incoming"``                        |Uniquely identifies the log            |
|             |                  |                                      |entry together with the value of       |
|             |                  |                                      |``msg``.                               |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``level``   |``number``        |``"0"``                               |The detail level of the log entry, do  |
|             |                  |                                      |not confuse with                       |
|             |                  |                                      |:ref:`setting-yaml-logging.loglevel`.  |
|             |                  |                                      |Not actively used currently.           |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``prio``    |``enum``          |``"Notice"``                          |One of ``Alert=1``, ``Critical=2``,    |
|             |                  |                                      |``Error=3``, ``Warning=4``,            |
|             |                  |                                      |``Notice=5``, ``Info=6``,              |
|             |                  |                                      |``Debug=7``. A log entry will only     |
|             |                  |                                      |produced if its ``prio`` is equal or   |
|             |                  |                                      |lower than                             |
|             |                  |                                      |:ref:`setting-yaml-logging.loglevel`.  |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``tid``     |``number``        |``"2"``                               |The Posix worker thread id that        |
|             |                  |                                      |produced the log entry. If not produced|
|             |                  |                                      |by a worker thread, the value is zero. |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``ts``      |``number``        |``"1697614303.039"``                  |Number of seconds since the Unix epoch,|
|             |                  |                                      |including fractional part.             |
+-------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+

A log entry can also have zero or more additional key-value pairs. Common keys are:

+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| **Key**     | **Type**            |**Example**                           | **Remarks**                           |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``error``    |``string``           |``"No such file or directory"``       |An error cause.                        |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``address``  |``ip address:port``  |``"[::]:5301"``                       |An IP: port combination.               |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``addresses``|``list of subnets``  |``"127.0.0.0/8 ::ffff:0:0/96"``       |A list of subnets, space separated.    |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``path``     |``filesystem path``  |``"tmp/api-dir/apizones"``            |                                       |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``proto``    |``string``           |``"udp"``                             |                                       |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``qname``    |``DNS name``         |``"example.com"``                     |                                       |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``qtype``    |``DNS Query Type``   |``"AAAA"``                            |Text representation of DNS query type. |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| ``rcode``   |``DNS Response Code``|``"3"``                               |Numeric DNS response code              |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|``mtid``     |``Number``           |``"234"``                             |The id of the MThread that produced the|
|             |                     |                                      |log entry.                             |
+-------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+

The ``systemd-journal`` backend
-------------------------------
The ``systemd-journal`` structured logging backend uses mostly the same keys and values as the default backend, with the exceptions:

- keys are capitalized as required for ``systemd-journal``.
- ``msg`` is translated to ``MESSAGE``.
- ``prio`` is translated to ``PRIORITY``.
- ``ts`` is translated to ``TIMESTAMP``.
- If the original key is in a list of keys special to ``systemd-journal``, it is capitalized and prepended by ``PDNS_``.
  The list of special keys is: message, message_id, priority, code_file, code_line, code_func, errno, invocation_id, user_invocation_id, syslog_facility, syslog_identifier, syslog_pid, syslog_timestamp, syslog_raw, documentation, tid, unit, user_unit, object_pid.

To use this logging backend, add the ``--structured-logging-backend=systemd-journal`` to the command line in the systemd unit file.
Note that adding it to the recursor configuration file does not work as expected, as this file is processed after the logging has been set up.

To query the log, use a command similar to::

  # journalctl -r -n 1 -o json-pretty -u pdns-recursor.service

The ``json`` backend
--------------------
The ``json`` structured logging backend has been added in version 5.1.0 and uses the same keys and values as the default backend.
An example of a log object::

    {"level": "0", "limit": "10765", "msg": "Raised soft limit on number of filedescriptors to match max-mthreads and threads settings", "priority": "4", "subsystem": "config", "tid": "0", "ts": "1709285994.851"}

All values are represented as strings.

The JSON log objects are written to the standard error stream.
